{START}
Advocates of press freedoms had urged the new administration to instead drop a Trump-era effort to prosecute
the WikiLeaks founder.
WASHINGTON -- The Biden administration has signaled that for now it is continuing its predecessor's attempt to
prosecute Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, as the Justice Department filed a brief this week appealing to a
British court to overturn a ruling that blocked his extradition to the United States.
This week, human rights and civil liberties groups had asked the acting attorney general, Monty Wilkinson, to
abandon the effort to prosecute Mr. Assange, arguing that the case the Trump administration developed against
him could establish a precedent posing a grave threat to press freedoms.
The Justice Department had been due to file a brief in support of its appeal of a judge's ruling last month blocking
the extradition of Mr. Assange on the grounds that American prison conditions are inhumane.
The appeal was lodged on Jan. 19 -- the last full day of the Trump administration -- so the decision to proceed with
filing the brief was the first opportunity for the Biden administration to reconsider the disputed prosecution effort.
A spokeswoman from the Crown Prosecution Office said on Friday that the American government filed the brief on
Thursday.
The brief itself was not immediately available. Filings in British court, unlike in the United States, are not public by
default. Marc Raimondi, a Justice Department spokesman, said the American government was not permitted to
distribute it, but confirmed its filing.
"We are continuing to seek extradition," he said.
The case against Mr. Assange is complex and does not turn on whether he is a journalist, but rather on whether
the journalistic activities of soliciting and publishing classified information can be treated as a crime in the United
States. The charges center on his 2010 publication of diplomatic and military files leaked by Chelsea Manning, not
his later publication of Democratic Party emails hacked by Russia during the 2016 election.
Prosecutors have separately accused him of participating in a hacking conspiracy, which is not a journalistic
activity. The immediate issue at hand in the extradition case, however, is neither of those things, but rather
whether American prison conditions are inhumane.
In January, a British judge, Vanessa Baraitser of the Westminster Magistrates' Court, denied Mr. Assange's
extradition -- citing harsh conditions for security-related prisoners in American jails and the risk that Mr. Assange
might be driven to commit suicide if held under them. She held that "the mental condition of Mr. Assange is such
that it would be oppressive to extradite him to the United States."
In its new brief, the Justice Department was expected to defend how the federal Bureau of Prisons handles
security inmates and to argue that such conditions were not a legitimate reason for the close American ally to
block an otherwise valid extradition request.
Rebecca Vincent, the director of international campaigns for Reporters Without Borders, said the group was
"extremely disappointed" that the Biden Justice Department had pressed on with the effort to bring Mr. Assange to
the United States for prosecution.
"This marks a major missed opportunity for President Biden to distance himself from the Trump administration's
terrible record on press freedom," Ms. Vincent said.
She warned: "The U.S. government is creating a dangerous precedent that will have a distinct chilling effect on
national security reporting around the world. No journalist, publisher or source can be confident that they wouldn't
be criminally pursued for similar public interest reporting."
Ms. Vincent also characterized the case against Mr. Assange as "political." In January, however, Judge Baraitser
had rejected Mr. Assange's arguments that the American charges against him were politically motivated, ruling
that they had been brought in good faith. The Justice Department had said that it was "gratified" by that part of her
ruling.
During the Obama administration, Justice Department officials weighed whether to charge Mr. Assange. But they
worried that doing so would raise novel First Amendment issues and could establish a precedent that could
damage press freedoms in the United States, since traditional news organizations like The New York Times also
sometimes publish information the government has deemed classified.
The Obama administration never charged Mr. Assange. But the Trump administration moved forward with a
prosecution. Its first indictment merely accused Mr. Assange of a hacking conspiracy, but it then filed a
superseding indictment charging him under the Espionage Act in connection with publishing classified
documents.
In 2019, as Mr. Biden was seeking the Democratic Party's nomination for president, The Times asked whether he
would keep or jettison the novel Espionage Act charges against Mr. Assange the Trump administration had
brought.
In a written answer, Mr. Biden demurred from taking a position on the case but drew a line between journalistic
activities and hacking.
"Journalists have no constitutional right to break into a government office, or hack into a government computer, or
bribe a government employee, to get information," Mr. Biden wrote, adding, "We should be hesitant to prosecute a
journalist who has done nothing more than receive and publish confidential information and has not otherwise
broken the law."
Charlie Savage reported from Washington, and Elian Peltier from London.
{END}

{START}
A Friday deadline in the London extradition case may force the Biden administration to decide whether to keep
pursuing a Trump-era policy.
WASHINGTON -- A coalition of civil liberties and human rights groups urged the Biden administration on Monday to

drop efforts to extradite the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange from Britain and prosecute him, calling the Trump-
era case against him "a grave threat to press freedom."

The coalition sent a letter urging a change in course before a Friday deadline for the Justice Department to file a
brief in a London court. American prosecutors are due to explain in detail their decision -- formally lodged on Jan.
19, the last full day of the Trump administration -- to appeal a ruling blocking their request to extradite Mr.
Assange.
The litigation deadline may force the new administration to confront a decision: whether to press on with the
Trump-era approach to Mr. Assange, or to instead drop the matter.
Democrats like the new Biden team are no fan of Mr. Assange, whose publication in 2016 of Democratic emails
stolen by Russia aided Donald J. Trump's narrow victory over Hillary Clinton. But the charges center instead on his
2010 publication of American military and diplomatic documents leaked by Chelsea Manning, and they raise
profound First Amendment issues.
"The indictment of Mr. Assange threatens press freedom because much of the conduct described in the indictment
is conduct that journalists engage in routinely -- and that they must engage in in order to do the work the public
needs them to do," the letter said, adding: "News organizations frequently and necessarily publish classified
information in order to inform the public of matters of profound public significance."
The Freedom of the Press Foundation organized the letter. Other signers -- about two dozen groups -- included the
American Civil Liberties Union, Amnesty International USA, the Center for Constitutional Rights, the Committee to
Protect Journalists, Demand Progress, the Electronic Frontier Foundation, Human Rights Watch, the Knight First
Amendment Institute at Columbia University, the Project on Government Oversight and Reporters Without Borders.
"Most of the charges against Assange concern activities that are no different from those used by investigative
journalists around the world every day," Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch, said in a
separate statement. "President Biden should avoid setting a terrible precedent by criminalizing key tools of
independent journalism that are essential for a healthy democracy."
For now, the Justice Department remains committed to appealing the denial of its request to extradite Mr.
Assange, said Marc Raimondi, a spokesman for its National Security Division.
The deadline to either continue working to extradite Mr. Assange by filing the brief or drop the matter reflects a
common legal policy dilemma when a new administration takes over and confronts matters inherited from its
predecessor. Newly installed officials face too many issues to make careful decisions on all at once, so some get
punted.
But litigation calendars can force early decisions about whether to proceed or shift direction in some cases. It is
often easier to stay the course, based on an argument that the issue can be revisited later when there is more time.
But once the new administration has started down that path, it owns the policy as a matter of political and
bureaucratic reality and so can effectively get locked in.
Complicating matters for making any decision to keep or jettison the Trump-era policy to go after Mr. Assange with
criminal charges, the Biden administration's intended leadership team is not yet in place at the Justice
Department. The Senate has yet to confirm Mr. Biden's nominee to be attorney general, Judge Merrick B. Garland.
In the meantime, the department is being temporarily led by a caretaker career official, Monty Wilkinson, the acting
attorney general to whom the letter was addressed.
After Mr. Assange published the documents provided by Ms. Manning in 2010, the Obama administration engaged
in extensive deliberations under Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. over whether to prosecute Mr. Assange but
never charged him with a crime.
By contrast, Ms. Manning, a low-level Army intelligence analyst who downloaded the archives of documents and
sent them to WikiLeaks, was convicted at a court-martial trial in 2013 of leaking the documents and sentenced to
35 years in prison. President Barack Obama commuted most of the remainder of her sentence in 2017.
But law enforcement officials under Mr. Obama shied away from bringing charges against Mr. Assange. They
feared that there was no legally meaningful way to distinguish his actions from those of conventional investigative
national-security journalism as practiced by mainstream news organizations like The New York Times. The Obama
team did not want to create a precedent that could chill or cripple traditional journalism, according to people
familiar with its deliberations.
In March 2018, however, under Attorney General Jeff Sessions, the Trump Justice Department obtained a grand
jury indictment against Mr. Assange. It initially sidestepped press freedom issues by narrowly accusing him of
participating in a hacking-related criminal conspiracy with Ms. Manning, rather than focusing on his publication of
government secrets.
That indictment was unsealed in April 2019, when Mr. Assange was dragged out of the Ecuadorean Embassy in
London and arrested. (He had taken refuge there in 2012, initially to avoid extradition to Sweden to face questions
about sexual assault accusations, which he has denied. Sweden had rescinded its arrest warrant for Mr. Assange
in 2017.)
The Justice Department -- by then under Attorney General William P. Barr -- then obtained a superseding indictment
expanding the charges against Mr. Assange to include allegations that his journalistic-style activities violated the
Espionage Act. A second superseding indictment later added more allegations related to the notion of a hacking
conspiracy.
Notably, there is some overlap in personnel from earlier internal debates about the dilemma raised by Mr. Assange.
The top national security official in the Trump Justice Department, John C. Demers, remains in place atop its
National Security Division for now; the Biden transition asked him to temporarily stay on for continuity purposes
even as most other Trump political appointees resigned.
Mr. Demers's predecessor from 2013 to 2016, John Carlin, has returned to the Justice Department and is currently
serving as the acting deputy attorney general. Mr. Carlin's predecessor, Lisa O. Monaco, who ran the National
Security Division from 2011 to 2013, is Mr. Biden's nominee to be deputy attorney general but has not yet been
confirmed.
The letter from the rights groups portrayed the Trump-era Justice Department's decision to proceed against Mr.
Assange as jeopardizing journalism "that is crucial to democracy" more broadly, and noted that the Trump
administration had "positioned itself as an antagonist to the institution of a free and unfettered press in numerous
ways."
They added: "We are deeply concerned about the way that a precedent created by prosecuting Assange could be
leveraged -- perhaps by a future administration -- against publishers and journalists of all stripes."
Since the original indictment was unsealed, lawyers for Mr. Assange have fought the extradition request, arguing
that the United States was prosecuting him for political reasons.
A British judge in January largely rejected those arguments, holding that he had been charged "in good faith." But
she denied his extradition anyway -- citing harsh conditions for security-related prisoners in American jails and the
risk that Mr. Assange might be driven to commit suicide. It is that rationale that the brief due on Friday would
appeal.
{END}

{START}
Supporters of the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange have enlisted a lobbyist with connections to the president
and filed a clemency petition with the White House.
WASHINGTON -- Allies of the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange have ramped up a push for a last-minute pardon
from President Trump, enlisting a lobbyist with connections to the administration, trying to rally supporters across
the political spectrum and filing a clemency petition with the White House.
The effort comes at a delicate moment for Mr. Assange and during a period of tension between the United States
and Britain over a case that his supporters say has substantial implications for press freedoms.
The Justice Department announced last week that it would appeal a British judge's ruling blocking the extradition
of Mr. Assange to the United States to face trial on charges of violating the Espionage Act and conspiring to hack
government computers. The charges stemmed from WikiLeaks's publication in 2010 of classified documents
related to the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Mr. Assange's supporters had been optimistic about the prospects of a pardon from Mr. Trump, who has issued
dozens of contentious clemency grants since losing his re-election bid. But they now worry that pressure over his
supporters' ransacking of the Capitol last week could derail plans for additional clemencies before he leaves office
on Jan. 20.
As unlikely as the prospect of a pardon from Mr. Trump might be, Mr. Assange's supporters are eager to try before
President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr. takes office.
As vice president, Mr. Biden called the WikiLeaks founder a "high-tech terrorist." Some of his top advisers blame
Mr. Assange and WikiLeaks for helping Mr. Trump win the presidency in 2016 by publishing emails from
Democrats associated with Hillary Clinton's campaign, which U.S. officials say were stolen by Russian intelligence
to damage her candidacy. Mr. Trump has long downplayed Russia's role in the 2016 election.
For Mr. Assange's supporters and press freedom advocates, though, the issues at stake transcend him or politics.
"This is so much bigger than Julian," said Mark Davis, a former journalist who worked with Mr. Assange in
Australia, where they are from. If Mr. Assange is prosecuted, "it will have a chilling effect on all national security
journalism," Mr. Davis said, adding: "If we can get Julian off, then the precedent hasn't been set. If Julian goes
down, then it's bad for all of us."
Mr. Davis, who is now a lawyer specializing in national security and whistle-blower cases, is on the board of
Blueprint for Free Speech, an Australia-based nonprofit group that advocates for press freedoms and whistle-
blower protections. The group, which was started by Suelette Dreyfus, a former journalist who is an old friend and

collaborator with Mr. Assange, signed a pro bono contract on Saturday with the lobbyist Robert Stryk to seek a
pardon for Mr. Assange.
During Mr. Trump's presidency, Mr. Stryk, who is well connected in Trump administration circles, has developed a
lucrative business representing foreign clients in precarious geopolitical situations.
He has worked for a jailed Saudi prince who had fallen out of favor with his country's powerful de facto leader, as
well as the administration of President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela, which the Trump administration considers
illegitimate. Mr. Stryk also worked for Isabel dos Santos, the daughter of Angola's former president, who is
accused of embezzling millions of dollars from a state oil company she once headed, as well as the government of
the former Congolese president Joseph Kabila, which had faced American sanctions for human rights abuses and
corruption.
Mr. Stryk said that he was representing Blueprint for Free Speech to seek a pardon for Mr. Assange without pay
because of his belief in free speech, and that he would continue pushing for the pardon in the Biden administration
if Mr. Trump did not grant it.
"This is not a partisan issue," Mr. Stryk said.
The contract, which he said he had disclosed to the Justice Department under the Foreign Agents Registration Act,
calls for his company, Stryk Global Diplomacy, to "facilitate meetings and interactions with the president and the
president-elect's administrations" to "obtain a full pardon" for Mr. Assange.
Mr. Davis said Mr. Stryk had been chosen partly because of his entree into Mr. Trump's administration, which the
group sees as its best chance to secure a pardon.
Mr. Davis noted that Mr. Assange, 49, was indicted during Mr. Trump's presidency. "We are unabashedly reaching
out to the Republican Party on this issue in the final weeks to correct something before it's too late, and before it
become part of Trump's legacy," Mr. Davis said.
He said, "If Joe Biden is sympathetic, that's well and good, and we certainly hope he is." But, he added, "it's a far
simpler process for an outgoing president than an incoming president."
Mr. Assange's cause has been taken up by a range of media freedom and human rights organizations, public
officials and celebrities, including the actress Pamela Anderson.
Blueprint for Free Speech is working to harness some of that support, including from Ms. Anderson, a friend of Mr.
Assange, who said in an interview that she had been trying to connect with Mr. Trump to plead the case. "I just
hate to see him deteriorate in jail right now," she said of Mr. Assange, describing the pardon push as "a last-ditch
effort for all of us who are Julian Assange supporters."
Asked about the effort by Blueprint, Jennifer Robinson, a lawyer representing Mr. Assange, said he "is encouraged
by and supports efforts" by a variety of prominent supporters around the world.
Mr. Davis stressed that Blueprint's push was independent of parallel efforts by Mr. Assange's family and his
lawyers, though Mr. Stryk has been in contact with Barry J. Pollack, Mr. Assange's Washington-based lawyer, who
is representing him against the criminal charges.
Prosecutors have argued that Mr. Assange unlawfully obtained secret documents and put lives at risk by revealing
the names of people who had provided information to the United States in war zones.
Mr. Assange's lawyers have framed the prosecution as a politically driven attack on press freedom.
Last month, Mr. Pollack filed a petition for a pardon with the White House Counsel's Office, which has been vetting
clemency requests for Mr. Trump, arguing that Mr. Assange was "being prosecuted for his news gathering and
publication of truthful information."
Mr. Pollack declined to comment on the petition, which was obtained by The New York Times, except to say that it
was pending.
The petition appears to be geared toward appealing to Mr. Trump, who has wielded the unchecked presidential
clemency power to aid people with personal connections to him or whose causes resonate with him politically,
including a handful of people ensnared in the special counsel's investigation of Russia's interference in the 2016
election and ties to his campaign.
The petition highlighted that the charges against Mr. Assange stemmed from WikiLeaks's publication of material
that "exposed misconduct committed in Iraq and Afghanistan during wars initiated by a prior administration." And
it notes that the Democratic emails published by WikiLeaks in 2016, which showed some in the party apparatus
conspiring to sabotage the campaign of Senator Bernie Sanders, Independent of Vermont and Mrs. Clinton's rival
for the Democratic presidential nomination, resulted in the resignations of party officials.
The petition does not address the United States government's findings about Russia's role in the theft of the
emails as part of its effort to undermine Mrs. Clinton, which has long been a sore spot for Mr. Trump.
The petition notes that the sentence of Chelsea Manning, the former Army intelligence analyst who provided the
military and diplomatic documents to WikiLeaks that led to the charges against Mr. Assange, was commuted by
President Barack Obama in the final days of his term.
Like Mr. Assange's lawyers in Britain, Mr. Pollack's petition raises concerns about Mr. Assange's health, noting that
the prison in which he is being held has been under lockdown after a coronavirus outbreak.
{END}

{START}
The decision came two days after the judge blocked the extradition of the WikiLeaks founder to the United States,
citing risks of suicide.
LONDON -- A judge in London on Wednesday declined to release Julian Assange on bail while he awaits a final
resolution in the case to extradite him to the United States to face charges of violating espionage laws.
On Monday, the judge ruled that Mr. Assange could not be extradited to the United States because he would be at
risk of suicide, and his lawyers sought to have him released on bail while the appeals process plays out. The
decision on Wednesday was a setback for the WikiLeaks founder, who has sought for years to avoid a trial in the
United States on charges that his supporters say pose a threat to press freedom.
The judge, Vanessa Baraitser of Westminster Magistrates' Court, said Wednesday that Mr. Assange -- who spent
seven years holed up in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London to avoid another extradition order -- still had an
incentive to abscond, and that he needed to remain in prison while U.S. prosecutors challenged her decision on his
extradition.
Mr. Assange, 49, was indicted by the United States authorities in 2019 on 17 counts of violating the Espionage Act
and one count of computer misuse over his role in obtaining and publishing secret military and diplomatic
documents related to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. If found guilty on all counts, he could face a sentence of up
to 175 years.
On Monday, Judge Baraitser ruled that Mr. Assange, who suffers from depression and has an autism spectrum
disorder, could not be extradited because "it would be unjust and oppressive" given his mental condition.
But the judge rejected arguments by Mr. Assange's legal team that the charges against him were an attack on
press freedom and were politically motivated.
Claire Dobbin, a lawyer representing the United States, said on Wednesday that American prosecutors would
appeal the extradition ruling, which is likely to keep Mr. Assange's case in British courts for at least several
months. The case could eventually land in front of Britain's Supreme Court.
Stella Moris, Mr. Assange's partner, reiterated her calls that the charges against the WikiLeaks founder be dropped
and that he be granted a presidential pardon.
"It's a huge disappointment," Ms. Moris said in a brief statement outside the court after Mr. Assange was denied
bail. "Julian shouldn't be in Belmarsh prison in the first place."
The editor in chief of WikiLeaks, Kristinn Hrafnsson, said Mr. Assange's lawyers would most likely appeal the denial
of bail.
In 2010 and 2011, Mr. Assange published confidential military and diplomatic documents related to the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan and provided by the former U.S. Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning. In 2012, he took
refuge at the Ecuadorean Embassy in London to escape extradition to Sweden, where he faced an inquiry into rape
accusations. That inquiry was later dropped.
During his seven years at the embassy, he continued to run WikiLeaks as a self-proclaimed political refugee. The
British police arrested him in 2019.
Since then, Mr. Assange, an Australian citizen, has been held at Belmarsh, a high-security prison in London where
he served a 50-week sentence for skipping bail when he entered the Ecuadorean Embassy to avoid extradition to
Sweden. He has completed that sentence but has remained at the prison while the American extradition case
makes its way through the British courts.
Doctors and experts who have examined Mr. Assange in prison said during the extradition hearings that he
suffered from depression and memory loss.
"I can attest to the fact that his health has seriously deteriorated, to the point where his life is now in danger," Nils
Melzer, the United Nations special rapporteur on torture and ill treatment, said last month in urging President
Trump to pardon Mr. Assange. Mr. Melzer, who visited Mr. Assange in prison, said last year that his incarceration
amounted to "psychological torture."
Lawyers argued during the hearings that Mr. Assange's mental health would deteriorate if he were extradited, and
have pointed out that Mr. Assange and other detainees at Belmarsh have been isolated for months after a
coronavirus outbreak at the prison.
Rebecca Vincent, the director of international campaigns at Reporters Without Borders, called the judge's decision
to deny bail unnecessarily cruel and reiterated calls for Mr. Assange's release.
"We fully believe that his mental and physical health are at high risk over a prolonged detention at Belmarsh
prison," Ms. Vincent said. "He has endured 10 years of hell for simply publishing information in the public interest."
Should Mr. Assange ultimately lose in Britain, his legal team could also try to take the case to the European Court
of Human Rights.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison of Australia said on Tuesday that should higher courts in Britain ultimately blocked
Mr. Assange's extradition to the United States, he "would be able to return to Australia like any other Australian."
{END}

{START}
U.S. officials want the WikiLeaks founder to face charges of violating the Espionage Act. But a judge in London
ruled that he was at extreme risk of suicide.
LONDON -- A British judge ruled on Monday that the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange cannot be extradited to the
United States to face trial on charges of violating the Espionage Act, saying he would be at extreme risk of suicide.
The decision in the high-profile case grants Mr. Assange a major victory against the U.S. authorities who charged
him over his role in obtaining and publishing secret military and diplomatic documents related to the wars in Iraq
and Afghanistan.
Rights groups and advocates applauded the ruling, but many expressed concern about the its rationale. The judge
focused on Mr. Assange's mental health issues, but rejected the defense argument that the charges were an
attack on press freedom and were politically motivated.
Mr. Assange, 49, who was present at Monday's hearing and wearing a face mask, was indicted in 2019 on 17
counts of violating the Espionage Act and conspiring to hack government computers in 2010 and 2011. If found
guilty on all counts, he could face a sentence of up to 175 years in prison.
The judge, Vanessa Baraitser of Westminster Magistrates' Court, said in Monday's ruling that she was satisfied
that the American authorities had brought forth the case "in good faith," and that Mr. Assange's actions went
beyond simply encouraging a journalist. But she said there was evidence of a risk to Mr. Assange's health if he
were to face trial in the United States, noting that she found "Mr. Assange's risk of committing suicide, if an
extradition order were to be made, to be substantial."
She ruled that the extradition should be refused because "it would be unjust and oppressive by reason of Mr.
Assange's mental condition," pointing to conditions he would most likely be held under in the United States.
The ruling on Monday at the Central Criminal Court in London, known as the Old Bailey, was a major turning point
in a legal struggle that has lasted nearly a decade. But that battle is likely to drag on, as U.S. prosecutors indicated
they would appeal. They have two weeks to do so.
A crowd of supporters outside the court erupted in cheers when the verdict was delivered.
"Today, we are swept away by our joy at the fact that Julian will shortly be with us," Craig Murray, a former British
diplomat and rights activist who has been documenting the hearing, told reporters outside the courthouse. He said
that while he was "delighted we have seen some humanity," the ruling on mental health grounds was an "excuse to
deliver justice."
Rights groups also applauded the denial of the extradition request, but some expressed concerns about the
substance of the ruling. Among them was Rebecca Vincent, the director of international campaigns for Reporters
Without Borders.
"We disagree with the judge's assessment that this case is not politically motivated, that it is not about free
speech," Ms. Vincent said. "We continue to believe that Mr. Assange was targeted for his contributions to
journalism, and until the underlying issues here are addressed, other journalists, sources and publishers remain at
risk."
Stella Moris, Mr. Assange's partner, echoed the sentiment, saying that while she was pleased that the extradition
request had been rejected, the charges had not been dropped. She called on President Trump to "end this now."
In a statement, the Justice Department said it was "extremely disappointed" by the decision but "gratified that the
United States prevailed on every point of law raised," and noted that it would still seek to extradite Mr. Assange.
Mr. Assange, who is Australian, rose to prominence in 2010 by publishing documents provided by the former U.S.
Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning. He then took refuge at the Ecuadorean Embassy in London to escape
extradition to Sweden, where he faced an inquiry into rape allegations that was later dropped. In the meantime, he
kept running WikiLeaks as a self-proclaimed political refugee. He spent seven years there before his arrest by the
British police in 2019.
During the extradition hearing, which began in February but was postponed because of the coronavirus pandemic,
lawyers representing the United States argued that Mr. Assange had unlawfully obtained secret documents and
put lives at risk by revealing the names of people who had provided information to the United States in war zones.
"Reporting or journalism is not an excuse for criminal activities or a license to break ordinary criminal laws," James
Lewis, a lawyer representing the U.S. government, told the court last year.
Mr. Assange's lawyers framed the prosecution as a politically driven attack on press freedom.
"The greatest risk for him in the U.S. is that he won't face a fair trial," said Greg Barns, an Australian lawyer and
adviser to Mr. Assange. "Then he could spend the rest of his life in prison, in solitary confinement, treated in a cruel
and arbitrary fashion."
The hearing was stymied by multiple technical glitches and restricted access for observers, which rights groups
and legal experts said hurt the court's credibility and hampered their ability to monitor the proceedings.
Mr. Assange has been held at Belmarsh, a high-security prison in London, since 2019. Mr. Assange remained in
custody after the ruling was announced on Monday, but his defense team said they planned to file an application
for bail on Wednesday as the appeals process continued.
Many have hailed Mr. Assange as a hero for transparency who helped expose U.S. wrongdoings in Iraq and
Afghanistan. But he has also been criticized as a publicity seeker with an erratic personality. The publication by
WikiLeaks of emails associated with Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign, which U.S. officials have said were
hacked by Russian intelligence to damage her candidacy, also undermined his reputation with many previous
supporters.
Mr. Assange jumped bail in 2012 and fled into the Ecuadorean Embassy in London. During his years there, he gave
news conferences and hosted a parade of visitors, including the singer Lady Gaga and the actress Pamela
Anderson. He had also angered embassy workers by riding his skateboard in the halls.
By the time he was dragged away, Mr. Assange had become an unwelcome guest. Weeks later, he was indicted in
the United States.
Mr. Assange's mental and physical health deteriorated while he was held in prison in Britain, experts warned. Nils
Melzer, the United Nations special rapporteur on torture and ill treatment, said in November 2019 that the
punishment against Mr. Assange amounted to "psychological torture."
Doctors said that his health had worsened during the hearing.
News and press freedom organizations, as well as rights groups, have long warned that Mr. Assange's indictment
and a potential trial in the United States would set a dangerous precedent for press freedom.
Prosecutors have never charged a journalist under the Espionage Act, but legal experts have argued that
prosecuting a reporter or news organization for doing their job -- making valuable information available to the
public -- would violate the First Amendment. Mr. Assange's actions remain difficult to distinguish in a legally
meaningful way from those of traditional news organizations.
Jameel Jaffer, the executive director at the Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University, warned that
the charges that Mr. Assange still faces "cast a dark shadow" over journalism. The charges focused on pure
publication of the material were of particular concern, he said.
"Those counts are an unprecedented attack on press freedom," he said in a statement, "one calculated to deter
journalists and publishers from exercising rights that the First Amendment should be understood to protect."
{END}

{START}
A British judge plans to rule on Monday whether the WikiLeaks founder should be sent to the U.S. to face charges
of violating the Espionage Act and hacking government computers.
A judge in London plans to rule on Monday whether Britain should extradite Julian Assange to the United States,
where the WikiLeaks founder faces charges of conspiring to hack government computers and violating the
Espionage Act by obtaining and releasing confidential documents in 2010 and 2011.
A ruling in favor of the U.S. extradition request could pave the way for a high-stakes trial that Mr. Assange has
sought to avoid for years, and which his supporters say poses a dangerous threat to press freedom. Mr. Assange
faces up to 175 years in prison if found guilty of all charges.
If the judge, Vanessa Baraitser, rejects the extradition request, however, it would give Mr. Assange a major victory
at a time when recent U.S. administrations have increasingly used the Espionage Act against journalists' sources.
Here is what you need to know about the ruling.
What are the possible outcomes?
Judge Baraitser will not rule on whether Mr. Assange is guilty of wrongdoing, but she will decide whether the U.S.
extradition request meets requirements set out under a 2003 extradition treaty with Britain -- namely, that the
alleged crime for which Mr. Assange is wanted could also lead to trial in Britain, had he done it there.
If Judge Baraitser rules in favor of the extradition, the case would go to Britain's home secretary, who makes the
final decision on extraditions. And it would be a politically delicate choice: Mr. Assange is such a high-profile
figure, and the charges he faces in the United States so serious, that a decision by the British authorities will have
long-lasting consequences.
Yet before moving to the home secretary, appeals are likely to keep the case in courts for months. And if Mr.
Assange were to lose, his legal team could also attempt to take the case to the European Court of Human Rights. If
he were to win on appeal, he could be freed.
President-elect Joseph R. Biden Jr. could play a critical role in determining the fate of Mr. Assange. "If the British
judge rules in favor of an extradition, and the U.S. is able to extradite, it will likely fall to the new president to make
a decision as to whether the government should continue with the prosecution," said Carl Tobias, a professor of
law at the University of Richmond.
As vice president, Mr. Biden called the WikiLeaks founder a "high-tech terrorist" in 2010, but it remains unclear
what he would do as president. Mr. Biden could pardon Mr. Assange, or the Justice Department could drop the
charges against him, or carry on with the prosecution.
Calls for President Trump to pardon Mr. Assange have also grown in recent weeks as Mr. Trump has issued a wave
of pardons and commutations before his term ends.
Britain has turned down several extradition requests from the United States in recent years. In 2012, it refused to
extradite Gary McKinnon, a British hacker who breached U.S. government computers in 2002, on the basis that he
was too ill. In 2018, a high court ruling also blocked the extradition of Lauri Love, who was accused of breaking into
U.S. government websites.
What is at stake with the ruling, and any U.S. trial?
A ruling in favor of extradition could subject Mr. Assange to life in prison.
The U.S. government considers Mr. Assange an individual who has put lives at risk by revealing names of U.S.
personnel and informants who provided valuable information in dangerous places like war zones.
"Reporting or journalism is not an excuse for criminal activities or a license to break ordinary criminal laws," James
Lewis, a lawyer representing the U.S. government, told the British court last year.
But news organizations and right groups say the charges Mr. Assange faces pose a serious threat to press
freedom.
"The future of journalism and press freedom is at stake here," said Rebecca Vincent, the London-based director of
international campaigns at Reporters Without Borders.
"If the U.S. government is successful in obtaining Mr. Assange's extradition and prosecuting him in the U.S., then it
could prosecute any journalist and news organizations under similar charges," Ms. Vincent added.
Greg Barns, an Australian lawyer and adviser to Mr. Assange, said, "The greatest risk for him in the U.S. is that he
won't face a fair trial." Mr. Barns added: "He could spend the rest of his life in solitary confinement, treated in a
cruel and arbitrary fashion."
Why is Mr. Assange in a British prison?
In 2012, Mr. Assange entered the Ecuadorean Embassy in London to escape an extradition request from Sweden,
where he faced rape accusations. He spent seven years in the embassy, but was arrested by the British police in
2019, and later sentenced to 50 weeks in prison for skipping bail when he entered the embassy.
The charges in Sweden have been dropped, and Mr. Assange has completed his 50-week sentence. He is not
accused of any crime outside the United States, but he remains at the Belmarsh prison in London as Britain
decides on his extradition. His bail requests have been rejected.
Several doctors have said that Mr. Assange suffers from depression and memory loss and could attempt to
commit suicide if he were extradited.
Nils Melzer, the United Nations special rapporteur on torture and ill treatment, who has examined Mr. Assange in
prison, said last year that his incarceration amounted to "psychological torture."
"I can attest to the fact that his health has seriously deteriorated, to the point where his life is now in danger," Mr.
Melzer said last month in urging Mr. Trump to pardon Mr. Assange.
Why is Mr. Assange wanted in the United States?
Mr. Assange, 49, was indicted in 2019 on 17 counts of violating the Espionage Act for obtaining and publishing
secret military and diplomatic documents. He was later charged with violating the Computers Fraud and Abuse
Act.
Mr. Assange's promotion of government transparency has made him a hero to many, but he has also been
criticized as a publicity seeker with an erratic personality.
The publication of the material exposed various crimes and wrongdoings committed by the United States in Iraq
and Afghanistan, and rights groups have hailed their release as valuable information for the public. Right groups
like Reporters Without Borders and Amnesty International have called for all charges to be dropped.
"The activities that Julian Assange engaged in are activities that journalists engage in all the time," said Julia Hall,
Amnesty International's expert on counterterrorism and criminal justice in Europe. "We wouldn't have information
without them."
What happened during the extradition hearings?
The hearings were delayed by the coronavirus pandemic and technical glitches that rights groups said hampered
their ability to monitor them.
In February, Mr. Assange appeared in a glass box, where he could not hear properly, according to observers. In
September, after an outburst from Mr. Assange, the judge warned that he would be removed from the courtroom if
he kept interrupting prosecutors. Mr. Lewis, acting for the U.S. government, argued that Mr. Assange faced
extradition over the publication of informants' names, not for handling leaked documents.
In their closing remarks, lawyers for Mr. Assange argued that accusations of espionage constituted a political
offense, and that an extradition on the basis of a political offense was barred by the extradition treaty between the
Britain and the United States.
Asked whether he would consent to extradition to the United States, Mr. Assange replied: "No."
{END}

{START}
The WikiLeaks founder's high-profile case was delayed for months by the coronavirus. Now it is being hobbled by
faulty livestreams and other technical issues.
LONDON -- As Mark Feldstein, the first witness on the first day of the high-stakes extradition hearing for Julian
Assange, appeared by video link from his home recently, reporters following the case remotely and those watching
in an adjoining court could see and hear him.
The judge and others in the main courtroom, however, had no idea what he was saying.
The hearing, taking place in the Central Criminal Court in London this month to decide whether the embattled
WikiLeaks founder should be extradited to the United States, is one of the most crucial junctures yet in a legal fight
that began nearly a decade ago.
But since it began in February the case has been stymied, first by the pandemic, which pushed it back by several
months, and now by a string of technical glitches. Since the high-profile hearing resumed last week, the court has
been forced to adjourn on several occasions while staff members try to address problems with the livestream and
video conferencing.
With the onset of the pandemic, the court, known as the Old Bailey, began conducting much of its proceedings
online. Because of travel restrictions, several witnesses were unable to testify in person, and limited seating
because of social distancing has forced many court observers to witness the hearing through video streamed to
overflow areas outside the courtroom.
The technical difficulties have drawn complaints from court observers and rights advocates who say that their
ability to monitor the proceedings has been hampered.
The problems are all the more vexing in a trial that is centered around the technically sophisticated world of
hacking and the release of a trove of secret documents on the internet.
The court took a break to try to fix the problems with the witness's video link, but the difficulties only worsened,
forcing another adjournment. Some days later, the hearing was delayed further over fears that a lawyer for the
prosecution might have come into contact with someone with the coronavirus.
The lawyer ultimately tested negative for the virus and the trial resumed on Monday. But technical difficulties
again hampered the day's agenda, with another witness inaudible on the livestream.
Rebecca Vincent, the director of international campaigns for Reporters Without Borders, who was in the court this
week, said there had "constantly been problems," with the livestream of the main courtroom cutting out and
witness testimony frequently garbled.
Ms. Vincent explained how Eric Lewis, a United States-based attorney acting as a witness for the prosecution, was
inaudible during his testimony on Monday, with the court trying and failing for two hours to establish a usable
video connection before adjourning for the day.
Things were little improved on Tuesday.
"There was rarely an extended stretch of time when I could adequately hear what was going on," Ms. Vincent said,
owing to a buzzing noise in the public gallery and an echo on the livestream in the viewing area.
On Wednesday, the first witness testimony conducted by video link -- with John Goetz, an investigative journalist --
began with some shaky moments but eventually settled down, and his testimony was largely audible.
The afternoon testimony of Daniel Ellsberg, the former military analyst who leaked the Pentagon Papers in 1971,
was also smooth for the most part.
But Ms. Vincent noted that the issues had already affected the proceedings in a number of ways, making the
situation "insufficient for observation and to ensure open justice."
From the start, press freedom advocates and rights groups have denounced the charges against Mr. Assange,
saying that they raise profound First Amendment issues because the publication of the classified material is
indistinguishable from the practices of traditional news organizations.
Mr. Assange, 49, was arrested in London last year after being expelled from the Ecuadorean Embassy, where he
had spent seven years behind a veil of diplomatic immunity.
The United States has indicted Mr. Assange on 18 counts of violating the Espionage Act for soliciting, obtaining
and sometimes publishing material that the government deemed classified, in connection with the release to
WikiLeaks of archives of military and diplomatic documents by Chelsea Manning, a former Army intelligence
analyst.
Mr. Assange is not facing charges over the later publication by WikiLeaks of Democratic emails stolen by Russian
hackers in the 2016 U.S. election.
In addition to the technical problems, rights groups complained that a number of international observers had been
denied access to the courtroom in an official capacity and that their access to the remote livestream had been
revoked.
Some, like Ms. Vincent, have been allowed to sit in an overflow courtroom open to the public, where the witnesses
are shown on video. But she said she worried that the technical issues were just the tip of the iceberg.
"What we are seeing now, this week, you can't really divorce the tech issue from the other restrictions on
observers," she said.
During the first phase of the hearing in February, Amnesty International and other observers had been granted
permission to attend the hearing as official monitors.
This time around, that has changed, according to Julia Hall, Amnesty International's expert in counterterrorism,
criminal justice and human rights in Europe. Her organization requested access to the courtroom, she said, but
was initially allowed access only to a livestream to view the hearing remotely. But last week, that was abruptly
revoked when the hearing began.
"This situation that we are in right now is quite disturbing, and it's unique," Ms. Hall said. "This court has failed
dramatically to recognize a key component of open justice, and that is how international trial monitors monitor a
hearing for its compliance with domestic law and international law."
Barring further delays, the hearing is expected to be finished by early October.
When asked about the issues during Mr. Assange's hearing, a spokesman for Her Majesty's Courts and Tribunals
Service, which administers the court, offered only a general statement.
"We work hard to ensure that any technical issues are identified and repaired as soon as possible," the spokesman
said. The Ministry of Justice, when asked for comment, directed requests back to the courts service.
In June, the ministry announced plans for an additional 142 million pounds, about $183 million, to help speed up
technological improvements and modernize courtrooms.
Several requests for comment from lawyers for the prosecution and from Mr. Assange's defense lawyers on the
impact of the technology issues have gone unanswered. But rights groups assert that, because of the implications
for press freedom, the issues must be resolved immediately.
"This case is of tremendous international public interest as it has ramifications in not just the U.S. and U.K. but
internationally," Ms. Vincent said.
Charlie Savage contributed reporting from Washington.
{END}

{START}
The British fashion designer came out of lockdown to perch inside a giant bird cage, suspended 10 feet in the air,
outside the Old Bailey criminal court in London.
LONDON -- Four months after Britain went into lockdown, most office workers have yet to return to the City of
London. The once heaving thoroughfares of this global financial hub, also known as the "Square Mile," have
remained largely empty since March.
But just after 8 a.m. Tuesday, a yelling scrum of photographers, reporters and protesters spilled across the
sidewalks and into the road outside London's central criminal court, the Old Bailey, to watch a 79-year-old woman
dressed in a yellow trouser suit and baseball cap suspend herself inside a bird cage 10 feet in the air, squawking at
the top of her lungs.
"I am the canary in the coal mine," shrieked Dame Vivienne Westwood, the flamboyant British fashion designer,
couturier to everyone from supermodels to world leaders, punk icon, eco-warrior and political activist. She held a
megaphone aloft and said to the cheering crowd: "If I die down the coal mine from poisonous gas, then that's the
signal."
Ms. Westwood had been lured out of 16 weeks in isolation by the plight of the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange,
who is fighting extradition from Britain to the United States.
Mr. Assange, 49, is wanted by U.S. authorities to stand trial on 18 charges, including conspiring to hack
government computers and espionage. Last year, the United States began extradition proceedings after he was
dragged from the Ecuadorean embassy in London, where he had been holed up for almost seven years.
"I am Julian Assange," Ms. Westwood continued, legs swinging in the breeze, as a garbage truck pulled over and
started to reverse loudly down a small side street. Several bemused members of the court staff peered through the
Old Bailey's large archways to get a look at the unfolding commotion, while a white van driver tooted his horn in
appreciation.
"And I am a canary. I am half poisoned already from government corruption and gaming of the system and legal
system by governments," Ms. Westwood said. The designer -- who used salty language throughout her speech --
said she was "still whistling away" while the world's 7 billion people did not know what was going on.
Ms. Westwood, who made her name by defining the rebellious aesthetic of London in the 1970s, has dressed the
Sex Pistols, supermodels like Naomi Campbell and Kate Moss, and celebrities like Harry Styles and Helena
Bonham Carter, translating the rigor and shock value of punk music into more commercially palatable tartan
offerings and iconoclastic ball gowns with safety pins, tulle and slogans.
She is no stranger to headline-grabbing stunts, from dressing up as Margaret Thatcher for a Tatler cover in 1989,
accepting an Order of the British Empire from Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace with no panties on and
driving a tank to then-Prime Minister David Cameron's Oxfordshire home in an anti-fracking protest in 2015.
Mr. Assange first made headlines in 2010 when he began publishing secret American military and diplomatic
documents that were provided by the former Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning, who was convicted at a
court-martial in 2013 of leaking the documents.
For the last year Mr. Assange has been held at Belmarsh Prison in London, and, if he is successfully extradited, he
could face as many as 175 years in prison if found guilty on all charges.
After several minutes on the megaphone and then being carefully winched to safety, Ms. Westwood pretended to
be a bird by screeching at her cage for photographers as protesters held up "Free Assange" banners nearby. Later,
she explained that her activist son, Joe Corré, a "captain" of a campaign in defense of Mr. Assange, was the
mastermind behind the protest.
Mr. Corré, who founded the underwear label Agent Provocateur, turned down a Member of the Order of the British
Empire honor in 2007 in a protest against Britain's participation in the Iraq war.
"There's no time to spare now whatsoever," Ms. Westwood said as she pulled on a face mask. "If Julian gets sent
to America, it is the worst thing that could happen in the world for justice and freedom of speech. This could
happen to every journalist."
Ms. Westwood also said that, despite being a designer in business for more than 50 years, she hadn't spent that
much time fashioning her canary outfit.
"It was the only thing I could find that was yellow, though I did try hard to make my eyes look like that of a bird --
can you see," she said, widening them to show off the wild multicolored plumes of crayon swirls that swept up her
temples. "Are you looking closely enough?"
{END}

{START}
WASHINGTON —One of the enduring mysteries left unsolved by the Mueller inquiry was whether Roger Stone,
President Donald Trump’s longtime friend and political adviser, ever communicated during the 2016 presidential
campaign with Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks.
Federal investigators chased the question for months to figure out who, if anyone, in Trump’s world knew that
WikiLeaks was going to release a trove of damaging Democratic emails in an effort to bolster his chances of
winning.
Now hundreds of pages of court documents from the federal investigation of Stone, released late Monday, show
that at least after the election, the two men had maintained a personal relationship. Stone had repeatedly denied
that fact after federal and congressional inquiries got underway.
Records show he exchanged messages with Assange in June 2017, seven months after Trump’s election victory.
The men discussed a different federal inquiry into the release by WikiLeaks in 2010 of classified American
documents, a decade-long saga that resulted in criminal charges against Assange.
“If the US government moves on you I will bring down the entire house of cards,” Stone wrote in a private Twitter
message to Assange. In another message, Stone said that he was trying to intercede “at the highest level of
government” on Assange’s behalf. “Fed treatment of you and WikiLeaks is an outrage,” he wrote.
Assange is now in a London prison, fighting extradition to the United States.
The records shed no new light on whether Stone, 67, directly communicated with Assange before the election.
Investigators for the special counsel, Robert Mueller, failed to resolve that question at least in part because both
Stone and Assange refused to cooperate. The team found insufficient evidence to charge anyone associated with
the Trump campaign of conspiring with Russia to influence the results of the election.
Questioned by a congressional committee about his contacts with WikiLeaks in September 2017, Stone lied
repeatedly under oath. He was convicted last year of obstructing a congressional inquiry, lying to federal
authorities and witness tampering and was later sentenced to 40 months in prison. He has yet to begin serving his
prison term, and has repeatedly and publicly implored Trump to pardon him.
In a statement, Stone reiterated his protests that he was wrongly prosecuted and said that the documents showed
“the baseless overreach of the Mueller witch hunt and exonerate me from the crazed left-wing media charges of
Russian collusion, WikiLeaks collaboration and the receipt and dissemination of stolen emails, false narratives that
ruined my life for the last three years.”
The hundreds of pages of search warrants and affidavits were released in response to a lawsuit filed by The New
York Times and other news media organizations.
Prosecutors said that Stone lied to the House Intelligence Committee about his efforts to contact WikiLeaks before
the 2016 election because the truth would have embarrassed Trump and his campaign.
This month, Judge Amy Berman Jackson of U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, who oversaw Stone’s
case, rejected his request for a new trial. Federal authorities are expected to order him to begin serving his
sentence soon.
Stone’s explanations of his relationship with Assange have varied widely. Before the 2016 election, he first said he
was in direct touch with Assange, then said he was communicating with him through an intermediary. Later, when
those claims became a political liability for Trump, he said he was only bluffing.
“I have never met with, nor spoken to Julian Assange, either in person, by telephone or email or any other means,”
he said on his website in April 2018. “Assange himself has repeatedly and publicly said the same thing.”
The June 2017 exchange of messages shows that Stone tried to reassure Assange that he would escape criminal
prosecution. “With the trumped-up sexual assault charges dropped, I don’t know of any crime you need to be
pardoned for,” he wrote. He was apparently referring to a decision by Swedish authorities to drop a sexual assault
investigation that focused on Assange.
Assange replied: “Between CIA and DoJ they’re doing quite a lot. On the DoJ side that’s coming most strongly from
those obsessed with taking down Trump trying to squeeze us into a deal.”
Six days later, Stone wrote: “I am doing everything possible to address the issues at the highest level of
Government,” adding that he had to be circumspect because his communications were monitored.
The records also reveal that before the 2016 election, Stone created hundreds of fake Facebook accounts. One of
his assistants told investigators that he created “a couple hundred” Facebook accounts for Stone and that aides
helped Stone shape them to appear real.
Stone apparently wanted fake accounts so he could call greater attention to stolen emails, released by WikiLeaks,
that proved damaging to Hillary Clinton’s campaign. Facebook requires users to provide their real names and
information, but it is not a crime to create fake accounts.
{END}

{START}
The WikiLeaks founder appeared in a London court to fight attempts by the American authorities to make him
answer charges of espionage.
LONDON -- The United States government began laying out its extradition case against Julian Assange, the
WikiLeaks founder, in court on Monday by arguing that he had put lives at risk and was no better than an "ordinary"
criminal.
"Reporting or journalism is not an excuse for criminal activities or a license to break ordinary criminal laws," James
Lewis, a lawyer representing the U.S. government, told the court.
Mr. Assange has been indicted on 17 counts of violating the Espionage Act for his role in obtaining and publishing
secret military and diplomatic documents and he could face as many as 175 years in prison if found guilty on all
charges.
His lawyers will begin presenting their defense later in the week.
Mr. Assange's appearance in Woolwich Crown Court was the latest twist in a saga that stretches back to 2010,
when he began publishing secret American military and diplomatic documents that were provided by the former
Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning, who was convicted at a court-martial in 2013 of leaking the
documents.
From the outset, Mr. Assange's case has raised profound First Amendment issues.
He is accused of conspiring with Ms. Manning to break into a classified military network under another user's
identity. The subsequent disclosures included a classified military video showing a 2007 attack by Apache
helicopters in Baghdad that killed a dozen people, including two employees of the Reuters news agency.
To his defenders, dozens of whom gathered outside the courtroom in a show of support, Mr. Assange, 48, is the
victim of a politically driven prosecution.
Mr. Lewis, the lawyer for the U.S. government, told the court on Monday that the charges against Mr. Assange
were not connected to the publication of materials demonstrating wrongdoing by American military forces or
"embarrassing" officials, but for "publishing specific classified documents that contained unredacted names of
innocent people who risked their safety and freedom to aid the United States and its allies."
"These are ordinary criminal charges and any person, journalist or source who hacks or attempts to gain
unauthorized access to a secure system or aids and abets others to do so is guilty of computer misuse," he said.
Mr. Assange has largely receded from public view after he was dragged out of the Ecuadorean Embassy in London
in April. He had found refuge in the embassy for seven years to avoid extradition to Sweden over rape allegations.
He denied those charges, and the case has since been dropped.
His strange existence at the embassy, where he lived with his cat in a small corner room, helped him become
perhaps the world's most famous self-proclaimed political refugee.
He continued to run his internet group, hold news conferences and wave to admirers from an embassy balcony.
But with the departure in 2017 of Ecuador's leftist president, Rafael Correa, who had granted him asylum, Mr.
Assange's days in the embassy were numbered.
By the time the Metropolitan Police in London dragged him from the embassy in April, he looked haggard and
disheveled.
For the last year, he has been held at Belmarsh Prison, which is next to the courtroom where his extradition case
will be heard over the next month.
Mr. Assange's lawyers, in pretrial motions, suggested that they would cast the prosecution as politically motivated
and argue that their client was simply acting as a journalist and publisher.
Mark Summers, one of Mr. Assange's lawyers, has said that prosecuting his client could have a chilling effect on
press freedom.
"This is part of an avowed war on whistle-blowers to include investigative journalists and publishers," Mr. Summers
told the court last year.
Mr. Assange's legal team has also sought to tie their client to President Trump, telling the court that former
Representative Dana Rohrabacher of California, an ally of the president, had offered a pardon to Mr. Assange on
Mr. Trump's behalf if the WikiLeaks founder were to say that Russia had nothing to do with the 2016 hacking of the
Democratic National Committee.
The White House press secretary, Stephanie Grisham, has called the suggestion of a pardon offer "a complete
fabrication and a total lie."
{END}

{START}
A statement in a London court put a twist on a previously known attempt by a Republican congressman to get the
WikiLeaks founder to absolve Russia of election meddling.
WASHINGTON -- The White House on Wednesday denied an allegation that President Trump had offered to pardon
Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder who is fighting extradition to the United States, if he absolved Russia of
hacking Democratic emails during the 2016 campaign.
Mr. Assange's legal team told a court in London on Wednesday that Mr. Trump had made the offer in 2017 through
Dana Rohrabacher, who at the time was a Republican congressman from California.
Stephanie Grisham, the White House press secretary, dismissed the accusation.
"The president barely knows Dana Rohrabacher, other than he's an ex-congressman," Ms. Grisham told reporters.
"He's never spoken to him on this subject or almost any subject. It is a complete fabrication and a total lie."
It is not a new revelation that the congressman tried to broker a deal in which Mr. Trump would make Mr.
Assange's legal troubles with the United States go away if he provided evidence disproving that the Russians had
hacked the Democratic emails WikiLeaks published.
But the claim, which came the day after Mr. Trump pardoned numerous high-profile white-collar criminals, grabbed
attention because a lawyer for Mr. Assange portrayed Mr. Rohrabacher as acting on Mr. Trump's instructions.
Previous accounts have described Mr. Rohrabacher as freelancing an idea that he came up with on his own.
On Wednesday, a lawyer for Mr. Assange, Edward Fitzgerald, referred in court to a statement by another lawyer for
Mr. Assange, Jennifer Robinson, describing a purported quid-pro-quo offer conveyed by Mr. Rohrabacher,
according to a Daily Beast account of a hearing on what evidence could be admitted at an upcoming extradition
hearing.
The statement by Ms. Robinson, he said, described "Mr. Rohrabacher going to see Mr. Assange and saying, on
instructions from the president, he was offering a pardon or some other way out" of his legal troubles if Mr.
Assange "said Russia had nothing to do with the D.N.C. leaks."
The Wall Street Journal reported in September 2017 that Mr. Rohrabacher -- who lost his seat in the 2018 midterm
elections -- was trying to broker a deal for a pardon if Mr. Assange produced evidence absolving Russia of the
hack. That would have also absolved the Trump campaign of suspicions that it conspired with Russia.
But that article portrayed Mr. Rohrabacher as approaching the White House with an idea that he had come up with,
not acting as Mr. Trump's envoy. It said that he spoke with John F. Kelly, Mr. Trump's chief of staff at the time,
about the possibility of "a meeting between Mr. Assange and a representative of Mr. Trump, preferably someone
with direct communication with the president," but that Mr. Kelly had not passed that message on to the president.
After the Journal article, a local news program for a CBS affiliate in Los Angeles, KCAL, interviewed Mr.
Rohrabacher. He confirmed the account, saying that "The Wall Street Journal has the whole thing."
Mr. Rohrabacher also said in that interview that Mr. Assange "repeatedly told me that the Russians were not
involved at all."
But a later indictment of Russian officials and a lengthy narrative report by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller
III, provided extensive details about how the Russian government went about hacking the Democratic emails. Mr.
Mueller, however, did not find evidence proving any conspiracy with the Trump campaign.
Mr. Assange, who was holed up in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London to avoid extradition to Sweden for a sexual
abuse investigation, was arrested and extracted from the embassy in April 2019. It was the same day that the
Justice Department unsealed a narrow charge accusing him of a hacking conspiracy with Chelsea Manning, the
former Army intelligence analyst who leaked archives of military and diplomatic documents to WikiLeaks.
The next month, the Justice Department significantly expanded the case against Mr. Assange by adding charges
under the Espionage Act that he solicited, acquired and published classified information. The decision to bring
criminal charges for such journalistic activities -- a separate question from whether Mr. Assange counts as a
journalist -- was groundbreaking and has surrounded his potential trial with novel First Amendment issues.
But Mr. Assange is fighting the United States' request that Britain extradite him, arguing that the Trump
administration has brought charges against him for political reasons.
{END}

{START}
The cases against Julian Assange and Glenn Greenwald may be models for a crackdown.
When Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, was charged last year by the Trump administration in connection
with the publication of secret United States government documents nearly a decade earlier, many journalists
expressed deep concern about the dangerous precedent the case could set for investigative reporting in America.
But few seemed to consider that the case might also serve as a model for other nations eager to clamp down on
press freedom.
On Tuesday, Glenn Greenwald, an American journalist living and working in Brazil, was charged, in a criminal
complaint brought by Brazilian prosecutors, with cybercrimes in connection with his stories on private messages
among Brazilian officials that revealed corruption and abuses at the highest levels of the government. Brazilian
prosecutors asserted that Mr. Greenwald was part of a criminal organization that hacked the cellphones of
government officials. He has denied the charges. (Full disclosure: Mr. Greenwald is a co-founder of The Intercept,
where I work as a reporter; I also run the First Look Press Freedom Defense Fund, part of the nonprofit
organization that includes The Intercept.)
The case against Mr. Greenwald is eerily similar to the Trump administration's case against Mr. Assange. Last
April, the Justice Department charged Mr. Assange with aiding a source, the former Army intelligence analyst
Chelsea Manning, to gain access to a United States military computer database. In May 2019, the charges against
him were broadened, and he was indicted under the Espionage Act in connection with the publication of American
military and diplomatic documents by WikiLeaks.
Both cases are based in part on a new prosecutorial concept -- that journalism can be proved to be a crime through
a focus on interactions between reporters and their sources. Prosecutors are now scrutinizing the processes by
which sources obtain classified or private information and then provide it to journalists. Since those interactions
today are largely electronic, prosecutors are seeking to criminalize journalism by turning to anti-hacking laws to
implicate reporters in the purported criminal activity of their sources in gaining access to data on computers or
cellphones without authorization.
This blunt approach gives the government enormous leverage over journalists and, in the United States, provides
them with a detour around First Amendment concerns. If these cases become templates that prosecutors in the
United States and other nations follow, virtually every investigative reporter will become vulnerable to criminal
charges and imprisonment.
Both the Trump administration and the right-wing Brazilian government of President Jair Bolsonaro seem to have
decided to experiment with such draconian anti-press tactics by trying them out first on aggressive and
disagreeable figures.
In fact, by the time of his indictment last year, there was still an ongoing debate within the media about whether
Mr. Assange should even be considered a journalist at all.
In 2010, when WikiLeaks began publishing the huge leaks of United States government documents it had obtained
from Ms. Manning, Mr. Assange suddenly emerged as a strange new player in the modern journalistic landscape.
Under his leadership, WikiLeaks both published the documents itself and also shared many of the leaked
documents with other major news organizations, including The New York Times.
Mr. Assange was both a publisher and an intermediary between sources and reporters, which made it difficult to
define his journalistic role. His later involvement in the Trump-Russia case -- in 2016, WikiLeaks obtained and
released emails and other documents from the Clinton presidential campaign and the Democratic National
Committee from a hacker believed to be a front for Russian intelligence -- transformed Mr. Assange into an even
more incendiary character with little public support. (The federal charges against Mr. Assange are not related to
his involvement in the 2016 campaign.)
Mr. Greenwald revels in his divisiveness and his disdain for the mainstream media, and he and I have publicly
clashed over our differing views of the Trump-Russia case. But he is also a zealous journalist who came to
prominence in 2013 for his Pulitzer Prize-winning coverage of a giant trove of documents from the National
Security Agency that were leaked by the former N.S.A. contractor Edward Snowden.
Last year, Mr. Greenwald obtained another big leak, the private messages of Brazilian government officials
concerning a major corruption case in Brazil that had led to the conviction of the former Brazilian president Luiz
Inácio Lula da Silva.
Mr. Greenwald's reporting revealed that the investigation that led to Mr. da Silva's conviction was deeply politicized
and corrupt. The stories were explosive in Brazil, and ultimately helped lead to Mr. da Silva's release from prison in
November.
But Mr. Greenwald's reporting enraged President Bolsonaro, who had been leveling threats against the journalist
for months before the complaint issued on Tuesday.
In an interview with me on Thursday, Mr. Greenwald agreed that there are parallels between his case and Mr.
Assange's, and added that he doesn't believe that Mr. Bolsonaro would have taken action against an American
journalist if he had thought President Trump would oppose it.
"Bolsonaro worships Trump, and the Bolsonaro government is taking the signal from Trump that this kind of
behavior is acceptable," he said.
The State Department has not issued any statement of concern about Brazil's case against Mr. Greenwald, which
in past administrations would have been common practice.
"This is all about targeting reporters who are publishing information that is embarrassing, and not like the 90
percent of the leaks coming out of Washington that are official leaks designed to support the people in power,"
said Joshua Dratel, a criminal defense attorney in New York who has represented prominent whistle blowers and
who also represented WikiLeaks in a civil suit brought against it by the Democratic National Committee.
In fact, Mr. Trump's anti-press rhetoric and actions have encouraged authoritarian regimes around the world to
prosecute and jail journalists, and to impose new anti-press laws and other measures designed to curtail negative
coverage.
Joel Simon, the executive director of the Committee to Protect Journalists, said in an interview that one of the
latest tactics spreading around the globe is the creation of vaguely worded "fake news" laws that criminalize news
that government officials deem to be wrong. "Fake news" is, of course, a phrase that Mr. Trump has helped
popularize.
"Qatar just promulgated a fake news law this week," Mr. Simon said, noting that Singapore also has one. "These
fake news laws are absolutely correlated with the Trump administration."
The most tragic evidence that Mr. Trump is enabling a global crackdown on the press has been his failure to hold
Saudi Arabia's leader, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, accountable for the brutal 2018 murder of the
Washington Post journalist Jamal Khashoggi. "The Trump administration is an accessory after the fact to the
Khashoggi murder," Mr. Simon said.
While the Bush and Obama administrations were "inconsistent" on press issues, "they were still willing to discuss
concerns about press freedom with another country in the framework of the bilateral relationship," he added.
"That's gone now with Trump."
It will be tragic if journalists shrug off the attack on the contrarian Mr. Greenwald and don't see his case for what it
truly signifies -- that Trump-like attacks on the press are spreading like a virus around the globe.
James Risen is the senior national security correspondent for The Intercept. As a reporter for The New York Times,
he and another former Times reporter, Eric Lichtblau, received the 2006 Pulitzer Prize for national reporting on
secret domestic eavesdropping by the federal government.
{END}

{START}
Recordings have emerged of private conversations that Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, had while living in
the Ecuadorean Embassy. He and a Spanish prosecutor blame the United States.
MADRID -- This much has become clear in recent weeks: When Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, was living
in Ecuador's embassy in London, someone was spying on him, recording his private conversations. The question
is: Who ordered the surveillance?
Mr. Assange -- in jail in Britain and facing prosecution in the United States -- is scheduled to testify remotely later
this month before a Spanish judge in a criminal case accusing a Spanish security company of eavesdropping on
him illegally.
The Spanish court case has revealed a new set of secrets in the international saga of Mr. Assange, 48, showing
that his claims of being spied on were not just paranoia or a publicity stunt. But as with all things related to
someone who has been labeled a villain and a hero, a prophet and a crank, the revelations are subject to conflicting
interpretations.
In Spain's National Court, a public prosecutor and Mr. Assange's lawyers have presented a raft of evidence that he
was recorded while in the Ecuadorean Embassy, which they say violated his right to privacy. The material includes
video recordings, reviewed by The New York Times, in which his conversations with visitors are audible.
The prosecutor and Mr. Assange's allies argue that the C.I.A. was behind the spying. A spokesman for the agency
declined to comment.
After President Trump took office in 2017, the C.I.A. began espionage aimed at Mr. Assange, WikiLeaks and their
ties to Russian intelligence, and the Justice Department began building a criminal case against him. But it remains
unclear whether it was the Americans who were behind bugging the embassy.
The case adds another layer of complexity to the legal travails of Mr. Assange, who has been indicted in the United
States on charges of espionage and hacking that exposed classified national security secrets. The Justice
Department has asked Britain to extradite him, and British courts have begun considering the request.
His lawyers plan to introduce evidence from the Spanish case into the extradition case, arguing that it should block
the British government from turning him over to the Americans. They say that the surveillance includes recordings
of privileged conversations Mr. Assange had with his lawyers and doctors, and proves that he cannot receive a fair
trial in the United States.
The British courts are unlikely to accept that argument, according to Amy Jeffress, a lawyer at Arnold &Porter in
Washington and a former Justice Department attaché at the American Embassy in London. She said the legal
standard is whether extradition would comply with Britain's Human Rights Act, which protects the right to privacy
but balances it against considerations like national security and fighting crime.
Mr. Assange is scheduled to testify on Dec. 20 by videoconference from Westminster Magistrates' Court before
Judge José de la Mata some 800 miles away, in Spain's National Court in Madrid. The judge is handling the
investigation into UC Global, a Spanish firm that was in charge of security at the Ecuadorean Embassy during Mr.
Assange's long stay there.
David Morales, who founded UC Global after many years in the Spanish military, was indicted in October, charged
with privacy violation, bribery and money laundering. He denied wrongdoing, and Judge de la Mata released him
pending a trial, but ordered him to surrender his passport and report regularly to the authorities.
One of Mr. Morales's early security jobs was protecting the daughters of Rafael Correa, the president of Ecuador at
the time, who were living in Europe. That paved the way for a contract with Ecuador's embassy in London.
In 2017, Mr. Morales overhauled the security equipment and procedures at the embassy, replacing surveillance
cameras with new ones that had microphones, according to a 61-page court filing by the public prosecutor. Mr.
Assange was repeatedly assured by Ecuadorean officials that he was not being recorded.
In reality, he was. He took precautions like using a white noise device in an attempt to mask conversations, and the
Spanish prosecutor says UC Global took steps to counteract them.
The company put microphones in embassy restrooms, where Mr. Assange sometimes held meetings for greater
privacy, the court filing says. And it states that UC Global placed a microphone in a meeting room, hidden in a fire
extinguisher, that could record up to 12 hours of sound.
Recordings were sent to the company's headquarters in Jerez de la Frontera, in southern Spain, the prosecution
says -- a charge that Mr. Morales denies. When he was detained, the police also raided his home and company, and
have since been decrypting emails and information from his confiscated cellphone.
The court case also relies on the testimony of some former employees of UC Global who have been granted
witness protection. They said that Mr. Morales traveled to the United States once or twice a month, carrying with
him hard disks containing recordings from inside the London embassy.
Mr. Morales repeatedly ordered them not to talk with Ecuadorean officials about his trips, they said.
In the court filing, the prosecution asserts that Mr. Morales returned from a security fair in Las Vegas in 2015,
gathered his employees and told them that UC Global was going to work "for the dark side," which he explained as
referring to the United States authorities.
He signed a contract with Las Vegas Sands, the casino and resort company of Sheldon Adelson, and the
prosecution contends that Mr. Morales passed information about Mr. Assange to security officials at the company,
saying it acted as a go-between with the C.I.A.
In his hearing before the Spanish judge, Mr. Morales said that any secret recording made at the London embassy
was done on behalf of Ecuador's secret service and with the knowledge of the ambassador. The Ecuadorean
government has flatly denied spying on Mr. Assange.
Asked by the judge why his company had set up a remote access server to allow the transfer of information
gathered within the embassy, Mr. Morales said that "there was absolutely no outside access."
Mr. Morales is accused of bribing an embassy official, paying the official about $22,000 monthly to send positive
reports about UC Global's surveillance work back to the authorities in Quito.
WikiLeaks gained worldwide attention in 2010, when it published a vast cache of classified material taken from
American military computer systems, most of it about the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
That year, Swedish prosecutors sought to arrest and question Mr. Assange on sexual assault accusations, which
he said were fabricated as a pretext for handing him to the United States. Mr. Assange, who was in Britain at the
time, surrendered to the British police, posted bail and fought extradition to Sweden.
But in 2012, fearing that he would lose that case, he sought asylum in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London, and Mr.
Correa's government granted it. Mr. Assange stayed there for nearly seven years, skipping court appearances,
forfeiting his bail and continuing to run WikiLeaks.
Recently, the Swedes dropped their investigation, saying that the evidence was too weak for a prosecution.
In 2016, WikiLeaks published stolen Democratic Party emails that damaged the presidential campaign of Hillary
Clinton. Russian spies had hacked the party's computers, according to Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel,
but Mr. Assange denies any link to Russian intelligence.
As Mr. Assange's relations with his Ecuadorean hosts deteriorated, President Lenín Moreno, who succeeded Mr.
Correa in 2017, pressured him to leave. In April this year, Ecuador revoked Mr. Assange's asylum, and the British
police arrested him. He was convicted of bail-jumping and sentenced to 50 weeks in prison.
Mr. Assange contends he is a journalist, publishing what he receives from his sources, and not responsible if they
have obtained it illegally. The Obama administration reluctantly accepted that argument. The Trump
administration rejects it, and charges that in addition, he aided the illegal 2010 hacking.
David D. Kirkpatrick contributed reporting from London, and Charlie Savage and Julian E. Barnes from Washington.
{END}

{START}
More than 60 physicians signed a letter saying that the WikiLeaks founder might not survive until February unless
he receives an urgent expert medical assessment.
LONDON -- The mental and physical condition of Julian Assange has so deteriorated that he could die in a British
jail before his February hearing on extradition to the United States, a group of international doctors has warned.
In an open letter to Britain's home secretary, Priti Patel, more than 60 doctors called for Mr. Assange, the 48-year-
old founder of WikiLeaks, to be transferred from the high-security Belmarsh prison in London to a university
teaching hospital to receive an expert medical assessment.
"Were such urgent assessment and treatment not to take place, we have real concerns, on the evidence currently
available, that Mr. Assange could die in prison," the letter said. "The medical situation is thereby urgent. There is no
time to lose."
Their assessment is based on witness accounts from an October hearing at Westminster Magistrates' Court, in
which Mr. Assange was described as "exhibiting the symptoms of a torture victim." The analysis was corroborated
this month by Nils Melzer, the United Nations special rapporteur on torture, who wrote a report about Mr.
Assange's health, warning that his life was at risk.
"What we have seen from the U.K. government is outright contempt for Mr. Assange's rights and integrity," Mr.
Melzer wrote in the report. "Despite the medical urgency of my appeal, and the seriousness of the alleged
violations, the U.K. has not undertaken any measures of investigation, prevention and redress required under
international law."
The doctors' letter describes how, over the years, Mr. Assange was threatened with arrest if he left the Ecuadorean
Embassy in London to seek treatment for a series of ailments, including a cracked molar and shoulder stiffness.
In 2015, a trauma and psychosocial expert who assessed Mr. Assange's condition at the embassy concluded that
he was suffering from moderately severe depression.
Mr. Assange is serving a 50-week prison sentence for jumping bail, imposed after he took refuge in Ecuador's
Embassy seven years ago. He faces espionage charges in the United States for publishing classified military and
diplomatic documents.
Last week, the Swedish authorities dropped a long-running investigation into a rape allegation against Mr. Assange
after prosecutors concluded that too much time had elapsed since the events in question.
Richard Galpin, a BBC journalist present at Mr. Assange's court hearing in October, described the WikiLeaks
founder as "frail- looking" and said Mr. Assange had struggled to remember when he was born.
Doctors who carried out medical assessments on Mr. Assange last year while he was in the Ecuadorean Embassy
warned that his time there was "dangerous to his physical and mental health" and a "clear infringement to his
human right to health care."
The doctors who signed the open letter to Ms. Patel this week said they had done so out of a professional duty to
report suspected torture.
"We wish to put on record, as medical doctors, our collective serious concerns and to draw the attention of the
public and the world to this grave situation," they wrote.
{END}

{START}
"The evidence is not strong enough to form the basis of an indictment," the country's deputy director of public
prosecutions said.
LONDON -- The Swedish authorities announced on Tuesday that they would end an investigation into allegations of
rape and sexual assault made against Julian Assange, the embattled WikiLeaks founder, that date from 2010.
"The evidence is not strong enough to form the basis of an indictment," said Eva-Marie Persson, Sweden's deputy
director of public prosecutions. "In such a situation, the preliminary investigation should be discontinued, and that
is what has happened."
Mr. Assange, 48, is still in a British prison awaiting a United States extradition hearing, raising questions about
whether the end of the Swedish investigation would clear the path for that process to continue.
"This clears one hurdle away for Julian Assange," said Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond.
"It brings the focus on the extradition process, and what British authorities will be willing to do."
Sweden began investigating Mr. Assange in 2010, after two women accused him of assaulting them during
separate sexual encounters while he was visiting Stockholm.
When the Swedish authorities issued a European arrest warrant in 2012 seeking his extradition from Britain for
questioning over "suspicion of rape, three cases of sexual molestation and illegal coercion," he fled to the
Ecuadorean Embassy in London. Mr. Assange and his lawyers said they feared that if he returned to Sweden, he
would then be extradited to the United States from there.
He remained in self-imposed exile in the embassy for seven years, until his arrest in April after Ecuador revoked his
asylum status.
Ms. Persson said that investigators had questioned again the individuals who had been interviewed in 2010 and
spoken to two additional people who had not previously been interviewed. She said that the investigators had
found the accusers credible and their statements reliable but that some parts of the testimonies were
contradictory.
In 2010, Anna Ardin, a Swedish woman who later spoke publicly about the incident, accused Mr. Assange of
forcing her to have unprotected sex. A second woman said Mr. Assange had penetrated her without a condom as
she was sleeping during the same trip to Stockholm.
"Memories fade for natural reasons," Ms. Persson said, but she emphasized that the "injured party has submitted a
credible and reliable version of events."
"Her statements have been coherent, extensive and detailed," Ms. Persson said about one of the complainants.
"However, my overall assessment is that the evidential situation has been weakened to such an extent that there is
no longer any reason to continue the investigation."
Asked by reporters about the length of the procedure -- almost 10 years -- Ms. Persson said that the extensive
news coverage could have affected the case's viability.
"You have to consider how much the witnesses will have read and heard from the media," she said.
The Swedish authorities dropped the investigation in 2017, but it was reopened this year after Mr. Assange was
arrested in London and a lawyer for one of the alleged victims asked for it to be revisited, the prosecutor said. Mr.
Assange, who is Australian, has always denied the accusations, and his lawyers have repeatedly accused the
complainants of trying to unjustly slur the WikiLeaks founder.
Mr. Assange was detained last year and jailed for jumping bail after Ecuador abruptly withdrew its protection of
him. The United States is seeking his extradition over accusations that he tried to assist in a breach of classified
data.
In September, a British court ruled that Mr. Assange must stay in a British jail until his extradition hearing, which is
planned for early next year.
The Justice Department has indicted Mr. Assange on a slew of charges including 17 counts of violating the
Espionage Act, accusing him of the solicitation, acquisition, and publication of classified information from the
former army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning.
The charges raised questions about press freedom, and critics have expressed concern that the case could set a
precedent to criminalize future acts of national security journalism.
The end of the Swedish investigation into the sexual assault allegations simplifies matters for the United States
government in its effort to extradite him to American soil. Put simply, it means there is now only one country, not
two, that would like the British authorities to transfer custody of him for further legal proceedings.
The Justice Department declined to comment on how the end of the Swedish investigation would affect its case.
But Mr. Assange's lawyers welcomed the Swedish decision on Tuesday and said that it was time to turn to the
American extradition request. Kristinn Hrafnsson, the editor in chief of WikiLeaks, echoed that sentiment in a
statement published by the group.
"Sweden has dropped its preliminary investigation into Mr. Assange for the third time, after reopening it without
any new evidence or information," he said. "Let us now focus on the threat Mr. Assange has been warning about
for years: the belligerent prosecution of the United States and the threat it poses to the First Amendment."
Elisabeth Massi Fritz, a lawyer for one of the women who made allegations against Mr. Assange, said in an
emailed statement that she and her client do not share the prosecutor's assessment.
She said there are logical reasons why the oral evidence from nine years ago has changed and said that if the
earlier investigation had included more detailed questioning, "then the interviews would have been of higher quality
and we would have been able to use them today."
"Unfortunately, that is not the case," Ms. Massi Fritz said. "The only right decision would have been to interview the
suspect in London."
Megan Specia contributed reporting from London, Christina Anderson from Stockholm and Charlie Savage from
Washington.
{END}

{START}
LONDON -- Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, must remain in prison until an extradition hearing next year, a
judge in London ruled on Friday, citing a "history of absconding," according to British news agencies.
Mr. Assange had been scheduled to be released next week, after serving a 50-week sentence for jumping bail in
2012 and taking refuge in Ecuador's London embassy rather than accepting extradition to Sweden to face a rape
accusation.
But he is wanted in the United States, where he faces charges of conspiracy to hack government computers, and
of obtaining and publishing secret documents in 2010.
Mr. Assange has also been under attack for WikiLeaks' release during the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign of
thousands of Democratic Party emails stolen by Russian hackers, in what investigators say was an effort to
damage the presidential campaign of Hillary Clinton.
But Mr. Assange, who denied that the emails were stolen, has not been charged in connection with their release.
At the hearing Friday, District Judge Vanessa Baraitser told Mr. Assange that as a person facing extradition, he
would have to remain in prison, the BBC reported. "In my view I have substantial ground for believing if I release
you, you will abscond again," she said.
When asked if he understood what was going on, Mr. Assange, who appeared via video link from Belmarsh Prison
in Southeast London, wearing a loosefitting T-shirt, said, "Not really."
"I'm sure the lawyers will explain it," he said, according to the British television network ITV.
Lawyers for Mr. Assange and other supporters have described him as in deteriorating physical and mental health.
He was said to be too unwell to attend one previous hearing even by video link.
Mr. Assange's legal team did not immediately respond to questions. According to ITV, his lawyers declined to
make an application for bail on Friday.
Mr. Assange has been relying on the support of lawyers for years, as he fought multiple charges in different
countries. Hailed as a hero for transparency by some, and cursed as a criminal by others, his latest appearances in
the limelight have all been connected to those judicial proceedings.
While his role in publishing classified details of the United States' military actions in Iraq and Syria have earned
him praise, WikiLeaks' publication of Democratic Party emails alienated many supporters.
The United States has had Mr. Assange in its sights since 2010, when his organization published a giant trove of
classified documents, mostly about the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Last year an indictment, accidentally
unsealed, revealed a single count of computer hacking, saying he had conspired with the former Army intelligence
analyst Chelsea Manning to hack into a Pentagon computer network.
After British police arrested Mr. Assange in April, dragging his frail, unkept figure out of Ecuador's Embassy, where
he had been living for seven years, the United States moved to formally request Mr. Assange's extradition.
The Obama administration held back from pressing more serious charges against Mr. Assange. But things
appeared different under President Trump. In May, the United States added 17 charges to the list, including
violating the Espionage Act, a move that has raised profound First Amendment issues.
Mr. Assange's extradition promises to be a long and difficult process, decided by the courts but complicated by
questions of high-level diplomacy and politics.
In May, a United Nations expert who had visited Mr. Assange in prison said his punishment amounted to
"psychological torture," and accused Britain and the United States of "ganging up" on him.
A further complication came in May when Swedish prosecutors said they would reopen an investigation into the
rape allegation against Mr. Assange.
If Sweden issued an arrest warrant, it would be up to Home Secretary Priti Patel -- the British cabinet minister in
charge of policing and security matters -- to decide whether the American or Swedish request should have
precedence.
{END}

{START}
LONDON -- A British court on Friday set February 2020 as the date for the full extradition hearing on whether Julian
Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, should be sent to the United States to face a slew of charges, including several
under the Espionage Act.
Mr. Assange, 47, appeared by video link from Belmarsh Prison on the outskirts of London for his first hearing since
the United States formally requested his extradition. He had skipped a previous hearing because, his lawyer said,
he was too ill to appear. Some experts, including a United Nations official, said he had exhibited signs of a
deteriorating physical and mental condition.
Mr. Assange's hearing came days after Britain's home secretary, Sajid Javid, signed the extradition request from
the United States and expressed his support for Mr. Assange's detention.
"He's rightly behind bars," Mr. Javid told BBC's Radio 4.
Protesters holding signs that read "Hands off Assange" outside Westminster Magistrates Court in London on
Friday denounced Mr. Javid's decision and demanded Mr. Assange's release. If the court rules in the United States'
favor, the extradition process is expected to be a long and complicated one.
Prosecutors from the United States had initially charged Mr. Assange with a single count of computer hacking, and
said he had conspired with the former Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning to hack into a Pentagon
computer network, a crime punishable by up to five years in an American prison.
But in May, prosecutors added 17 charges to the list, including violating the Espionage Act, a move that has raised
profound First Amendment issues. Most of the new charges were related to obtaining the secret document
archives as opposed to publishing them, Justice Department officials said. But some worry it could set a
precedent to criminalize future acts of national-security journalism.
The charges stem from Mr. Assange's purported involvement in a 2010 leak of hundreds of thousands of classified
documents, mostly related to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, that proved damaging and embarrassing for the
United States and its allies.
In a brief court appearance on Friday, Mr. Assange, wearing glasses and a gray T-shirt, denied cracking a Pentagon
network password as prosecutors read out the accusations against him, according to Reuters.
"It is important that people aren't fooled into believing that WikiLeaks is anything but a publisher," Mr. Assange told
the court. "The U.S. government has tried to mislead the press."
Mr. Assange is serving a 50-week sentence for jumping bail in Britain and is still appealing that sentence. He was
removed from the Ecuadorean Embassy in London in April and promptly arrested, seven years after first seeking
refuge there to avoid extradition in a Swedish investigation into allegations made in 2010 by a woman who said
Mr. Assange had sexually assaulted her.
Last month, Sweden announced it would be reopening the investigation into allegations of rape. A Swedish court
has ruled that Mr. Assange should not be extradited to Sweden for the investigation, though he would still be
questioned in the case while he is imprisoned in Britain.
That decision removed the potential for dueling extradition requests from the United States and Sweden, at least
for now.
Outside the courtroom on Friday, Jennifer Robinson, a lawyer for Mr. Assange, said her client was being held in the
hospital's health care ward and "continues to suffer the permanent and difficult adverse health impacts" of his
long-term stay in the Ecuadorean Embassy, and now in prison.
"He's under a huge amount of pressure, and we are very concerned about him," she told reporters.
Last month, a United Nations expert on torture said that an examination of Mr. Assange showed an alarming
deterioration in his mental and physical state, and that he was suffering from psychological torture as a result of
the cases brought by Britain, Sweden and the United States.
The United Nations special rapporteur on torture and ill treatment, Nils Melzer, said in an interview that Mr.
Assange was "extremely jumpy and stressed."
{END}

{START}
GENEVA -- A United Nations expert on torture said on Friday that an examination of the WikiLeaks founder Julian
Assange in a British prison showed an alarming deterioration in his mental and physical state, and he sharply
rebuked Britain, Sweden and the United States for "ganging up" on Mr. Assange.
The United Nations special rapporteur on torture and ill treatment, Nils Melzer, said the examination in early May
revealed that Mr. Assange's "capacity to focus and coordinate have been clearly affected" by his imprisonment.
"He was extremely jumpy and stressed," Mr. Melzer said in an interview. "It's difficult to have a structured
conversation with him. There's so much going on in his mind it's difficult to have a dialogue with him."
Furthermore, he said in a statement, Mr. Assange should not be extradited the United States, where he faces
charges of conspiracy to hack into a Pentagon computer. He said that the cumulative effects of Mr. Mr. Assange's
punishment can only be described as "psychological torture."
The United Nations official said he had sent his findings to the governments of Britain, Sweden and the United
States, along with Ecuador. A spokesman for the British government said on Friday that the nation supported the
important work of the special rapporteur's mandate but disagreed with some of his observations and would reply.
Ecuadorean, Swedish and American officials could not immediately be reached for comment on Friday.
Mr. Assange, 47, hailed by many as a champion of transparency, has been sought by prosecutors around the globe
on a variety of charges. He jumped bail in Britain and sought refuge in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London as
Sweden was in the middle of investigating a rape accusation against him. The United States has accused him of
helping an Army private to illegally download and leak classified information in 2010, much of it about the wars in
Iraq and Afghanistan.
After he lived in the Ecuadorean Embassy in the British capital for seven years, his relationship with his hosts
soured over his arguments with the embassy's staff, his skateboarding indoors and what the nation's officials
described as threats and leaks meant to embarrass Ecuador. The country's vice president, who blamed WikiLeaks,
called the actions "despicable" and vowed to take action.
In April, the Ecuadorean government -- which had granted him asylum and, eventually, citizenship -- withdrew its
protection. The British police then hauled Mr. Assange out of the embassy and placed him under arrest. A British
court later sentenced him to 50 weeks in jail for violating the terms of his bail.
The United States is seeking his extradition to face multiple counts of espionage for his part in the release of
thousands of classified military and diplomatic cables in 2010. And he faces possible extradition to Sweden in
connection with the rape investigation.
On Thursday, Mr. Assange was to appear by video link from Belmarsh Prison in East London at a court hearing on
the United States' application for his extradition. But his British lawyer, Gareth Peirce, said her client was not well
enough to participate. The presiding magistrate set June 12 for the next hearing and suggested it could be held in
Belmarsh.
WikiLeaks said on Thursday that Belmarsh Prison authorities had moved Mr. Assange to its hospital wing after he
experienced drastic weight loss and other health problems. It also said that when Mr. Assange's Swedish lawyer,
Per Samuelson, visited him in Belmarsh on Friday, he found "that it was not possible to hold a normal conversation
with him."
Mr. Melzer is not the first United Nations expert to criticize the conditions of Mr. Assange's detention. The United
Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention condemned the 50-week sentence for jumping bail as excessive and
said that sending him to a high-security prison was akin to a conviction for a more serious crime.
Mr. Melzer said he had initially been skeptical about Mr. Assange's case and had turned down a request from Mr.
Assange's lawyers in December to investigate. But he said that what he found after having accepted a second
request from the lawyers in March, changed his mind.
"Wherever I delved into the case, I found a lot of dirty stuff," he said in a phone interview.
In 20 years of working with victims of war, violence and political persecution, Mr. Melzer added in his statement, he
had "never seen a group of democratic states ganging up to deliberately isolate, demonize and abuse a single
individual for such a long time and with so little regard for human dignity and the rule of law."
Mr. Melzer said that Britain should not extradite Mr. Assange to the United States or to any other country that did
not provide reliable guarantees that it would not transfer him to the United States. He cited the treatment
experienced by Chelsea Manning, the former Army intelligence analyst who sent WikiLeaks classified cables on
events in Iraq and Afghanistan, as grounds for concern about the conditions in which Mr. Assange would be held.
He also said that he was convinced Mr. Assange would not receive a fair trial. He challenged the conduct of
Sweden's prosecutors and criticized Britain's limitations on Mr. Assange's access to lawyers and to the complex
documents relating to the charges, which he said severely impaired his ability to prepare his defense.
In his statement, Mr. Melzer cited what he called systematic abuse of judicial powers; arbitrary confinement in
Ecuador's London Embassy; harassment and surveillance inside the embassy; and a "relentless and unrestrained
campaign of public mobbing, intimidation and defamation" outside it.
But John Demers, the head of the Justice Department's National Security Division, addressing the leaks of
Pentagon records linked to Mr. Assange, condemned him in May, telling reporters: "No responsible actor, journalist
or otherwise, would purposefully publish the names of individuals he or she knew to be confidential human
sources in a war zone, exposing them to the gravest of dangers."
During the 2016 presidential race, WikiLeaks also released thousands of emails hacked from the Democratic
National Committee and the personal account of John D. Podesta, the chairman of Hillary Clinton's campaign, in
an effort to harm her candidacy. The special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, concluded that the emails had been
stolen by Russian intelligence agents, which Mr. Assange has denied.
{END}

{START}
On Thursday, the Justice Department charged Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, with multiple counts of
violating the 1917 Espionage Act for his role in publishing tens of thousands of classified military and diplomatic
documents in 2010. The indictment supersedes an indictment unsealed in April on narrow grounds of attempting
to help an Army private surreptitiously break into a government computer to steal classified and sensitive
documents.
The new indictment goes much further. It is a marked escalation in the effort to prosecute Mr. Assange, one that
could have a chilling effect on American journalism as it has been practiced for generations. It is aimed straight at
the heart of the First Amendment.
The new charges focus on receiving and publishing classified material from a government source. That is
something journalists do all the time. They did it with the Pentagon Papers and in countless other cases where the
public benefited from learning what was going on behind closed doors, even though the sources may have acted
illegally. This is what the First Amendment is designed to protect: the ability of publishers to provide the public
with the truth.
President Trump has waged a relentless campaign against the news media, going so far as to repeatedly label it
the "enemy of the people." But with this indictment his administration has moved well beyond dangerous insults to
strike at the very foundation of the free press in the United States. The Espionage Act has been used against those
who disclose classified information only rarely, for good reason. It has never before been used against a journalist.
There is much to be troubled by in Mr. Assange's methods and motives, which remain murky. He released
numerous documents without removing names of confidential sources, putting their lives in jeopardy. The
government notes in its charging document that those put at risk included "journalists, religious leaders, human
rights advocates, and political dissidents" living in repressive regimes who provided information to the United
States.
Mr. Assange shared much of the material at issue with The New York Times and other news organizations. The
resulting stories demonstrated why the protections afforded the press have served the American public so well;
they shed important light on the American war effort in Iraq, revealing how the United States turned a blind eye to
the torture of prisoners by Iraqi forces and how extensively Iran had meddled in the conflict. The Times treated Mr.
Assange as a source, not a partner, and the relationship was not an easy one; his indifference to the risks of
exposing intelligence sources was a particular source of friction.
The Times does not condone breaking into government computers or irresponsibly publishing the identities of
sources. While Mr. Assange may not be the figure one would choose as the tribune of free speech, this is the case
the government has brought.
Mr. Assange, who was arrested in London last month after years of being given sanctuary in the Ecuadorean
Embassy since 2012, is currently in jail and fighting an extradition request from the United States.
Invoking the Espionage Act in this case threatens to blur the distinction between a journalist exposing government
malfeasance -- something that news organizations do with regularity -- and foreign spies seeking to undermine the
nation's security.
The Obama administration considered charging Mr. Assange with violations of the Espionage Act, a step that
might have recalibrated for the digital age who is a cybercriminal and who is a whistle-blower. But Barack Obama's
Justice Department refrained, worried that such a prosecution could ultimately threaten the robust exercise of the
First Amendment.
With this indictment, the Trump administration has chosen to go well beyond the question of hacking to directly
challenge the boundaries of the First Amendment. Mr. Assange is no hero. But this case now represents a threat to
freedom of expression and, with it, the resilience of American democracy itself.
{END}

{START}
WASHINGTON -- Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks leader, has been indicted on 17 counts of violating the Espionage
Act for his role in obtaining and publishing secret military and diplomatic documents in 2010, the Justice
Department announced on Thursday -- a novel case that raises profound First Amendment issues.
The new charges were part of an expanded indictment obtained by the Trump administration that significantly
raised the stakes of the legal case against Mr. Assange, who is already fighting extradition proceedings in London
based on an earlier hacking-related count brought by federal prosecutors in Northern Virginia.
The charges are the latest twist in a career in which Mr. Assange has morphed from a crusader for radical
transparency to fugitive from a Swedish sexual assault investigation, to tool of Russia's election interference, to
criminal defendant in the United States.
Mr. Assange vaulted to global fame nearly a decade ago as a champion of openness about what government
secrets do. But with this indictment, he has become the target for a case that could open the door to criminalizing
activities that are crucial to American investigative journalists who write about national security matters.
The case has nothing to do with Russia's election interference in 2016, when Mr. Assange's organization published
Democratic emails stolen by Russia as part of its covert efforts to help elect President Trump. Instead, it focuses
on Mr. Assange's role in the leak of hundreds of thousands of State Department cables and military files by the
former Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning.
Justice Department officials did not explain why they decided to charge Mr. Assange under the Espionage Act -- a
step also debated within the Obama administration but ultimately not taken. Although the indictment could
establish a precedent that deems actions related to obtaining, and in some cases publishing, state secrets to be
criminal, the officials sought to minimize the implications for press freedoms.
[Press freedoms and the case against Julian Assange, explained.]
They noted that most of the new charges were related to obtaining the secret document archives, as opposed to
publishing them. In the counts that deemed the publication of the files a crime, prosecutors focused on a handful
of documents revealing the names of people who provided information to the United States in dangerous places
like war zones.
"Some say that Assange is a journalist and that he should be immune from prosecution for these actions," John
Demers, the head of the Justice Department's National Security Division, said at a briefing with reporters. "The
department takes seriously the role of journalists in our democracy and we thank you for it. It is not and has never
been the department's policy to target them for reporting."
But Mr. Assange, he said, was "no journalist." Mr. Demers accused him of conspiring with Ms. Manning to obtain
classified information. "No responsible actor, journalist or otherwise, would purposefully publish the names of
individuals he or she knew to be confidential human sources in a war zone, exposing them to the gravest of
dangers," he said.
For the purposes of press freedoms, what matters is not who counts as a journalist, but whether journalistic
activities -- whether performed by a "journalist" or anyone else -- can be crimes in America. The Trump
administration's move could establish a precedent used to criminalize future acts of national-security journalism,
said Jameel Jaffer of the Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University.
"The charges rely almost entirely on conduct that investigative journalists engage in every day," he said. "The
indictment should be understood as a frontal attack on press freedom."
Mr. Demers left the press briefing without taking questions. And a Justice Department official who stayed behind
to answer questions on the condition that he would not be named would not address any about how most of the
basic actions the indictment deemed felonies by Mr. Assange differed in a legally meaningful way from ordinary
national-security investigative journalism -- encouraging sources to provide secret information of news value,
obtaining it without the government's permission and then publishing portions of it.
Notably, The New York Times, among many other news organizations, obtained precisely the same archives of
documents from WikiLeaks, without authorization from the government -- the act that most of the charges
addressed. While The Times did take steps to withhold the names of informants in the subset of the files it
published, it is not clear how that is legally different from publishing other classified information.
Barry J. Pollack, a lawyer for Mr. Assange, said his client was being charged with a crime "for encouraging sources
to provide him truthful information and for publishing that information." That dramatic step, he said, removed the
"fig leaf" that the case about his client was only about hacking.
"These unprecedented charges demonstrate the gravity of the threat the criminal prosecution of Julian Assange
poses to all journalists in their endeavor to inform the public about actions that have been taken by the U.S.
government," he said.
For most of American history, it was rare for the government to treat the leaking of its secrets to the news media
as a crime. But starting in the second half of the George W. Bush administration and accelerating during the
Obama administration, the Justice Department began making much more routine use of the Espionage Act to go
after officials who provided information to the public through reporters, as opposed to actual spies. The World War
I-era law criminalizes the disclosure of potentially damaging national security secrets to someone not authorized
to receive them.
On its face, the Espionage Act could also be used to prosecute reporters who publish government secrets. But
many legal scholars believe that prosecuting people for acts related to receiving and publishing information would
violate the First Amendment.
That notion has never been tested in court, however, because until now the government has never brought such
charges. The closest it came was indicting two lobbyists for a pro-Israel group in 2005 who received classified
information about American policy toward Iran and passed it on. But that case fell apart after several skeptical
pretrial rulings by a judge, and the charges were dropped.
Though he is not a conventional journalist, much of what Mr. Assange does at WikiLeaks is difficult to distinguish
in a legally meaningful way from what traditional news organizations like The Times do: seek and publish
information that officials want to be secret, including classified national security matters, and take steps to protect
the confidentiality of sources.
The Obama administration had also weighed charging Mr. Assange, but rejected that step out of fears that it would
chill investigative journalism and could be struck down as unconstitutional. A Justice Department official declined
to address whether there was any new evidence that had come to light recently or whether the Trump
administration had simply decided to take a step the Obama administration had shied away from.
The three charges that squarely addressed Mr. Assange's publication of government secrets were focused on a
handful of files that contained the names of people who had provided information to the United States in
dangerous places like the Afghanistan and Iraq war zones, and authoritarian states like China, Iran and Syria.
The evidence laid out in the indictment against Mr. Assange mapped onto information presented by military
prosecutors in the 2013 court-martial trial of Ms. Manning. Prosecutors in her case also alleged that her actions
endangered the people whose names were revealed in the documents when Mr. Assange published them, though
they presented no evidence that anyone was killed as a result.
A Justice Department official declined to say whether any such evidence now exists, but stressed that prosecutors
would need to prove in court only what they say in the indictment: that publication put people in danger.
Ms. Manning was sentenced to 35 years in prison -- by far the longest punishment for a leak case in American
history. But in one of his last acts in office, President Barack Obama commuted most of the remainder of her
sentence in January 2017.
She is now back in jail again, after a judge held her in contempt for refusing to testify about her interactions with
Mr. Assange before the grand jury in the Eastern District of Virginia that indicted him.
Ms. Manning's disclosure via WikiLeaks was one of the most extraordinary leaks in American history -- the bulk
disclosure of hundreds of thousands of State Department cables that revealed many secret things about the world,
dossiers about Guantánamo Bay detainees being held without trial, and logs of significant events in the
Afghanistan and Iraq wars that divulged, among other things, that civilian casualties were far higher than official
estimates.
When Ms. Manning's disclosures initially vaulted Mr. Assange and WikiLeaks to global fame, he was seen as a
villain by the Obama administration and the permanent bureaucracy of law-enforcement and national-security
officials, but treated as an icon by transparency and antiwar activists.
His image later transformed significantly when WikiLeaks published archives of Democratic emails that had been
stolen and provided to him by the Russian government as part of its covert efforts to help Mr. Trump win the 2016
election. But the legal case against Mr. Assange has nothing to do with those subsequent events.
Mr. Assange was indicted in March 2018 in federal court in Alexandria, Va., on a charge of conspiring to commit
unlawful computer intrusion. Prosecutors accused Mr. Assange of agreeing to help Ms. Manning crack an
encoded portion of a passcode that would have enabled her to log on to a classified military network under a
different user name than her own, which would have masked her tracks better. That came after she had already
started sending files, and they have not alleged that his efforts succeeded.
That charge was unveiled in April, when Mr. Assange was arrested in London after being dragged out of the
Ecuadorean Embassy, where he had lived for years to avoid capture. The United States has asked Britain to
extradite Mr. Assange, who is fighting the move, and the filing of the new charges clears the way for British courts
to weigh whether it would be lawful to transfer custody of him to a place where he will face Espionage Act charges.
{END}

{START}
Journalists and press freedom groups reacted with alarm on Thursday after the Trump administration announced
new charges against Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks leader, for publishing classified information, in a case that
legal experts say takes direct aim at previously sacrosanct protections for the news media.
In indicting Mr. Assange for obtaining, accepting and disseminating classified materials, the Department of Justice
opened a new front in its campaign against illegal leaks. While past cases involved government employees who
provided material to journalists, the Assange indictment could amount to the pursuit of a publisher for making that
material available to the public.
"It's not criminal to encourage someone to leak classified information to you as a journalist -- that's called news
gathering, and there are First Amendment protections for news gathering," said Theodore J. Boutrous Jr., a lawyer
who frequently represents media organizations like CNN. "The ramifications of this are so potentially dangerous
and serious for the ability of journalists to gather and disseminate information that the American people have a
right to know."
Federal prosecutors under President Trump have drawn criticism for extending a crackdown on leakers that had
ramped up during President Barack Obama's administration. The indictment of Mr. Assange -- which related to
WikiLeaks' publication of secret documents leaked by Chelsea Manning, a former Army intelligence analyst --
struck some experts as a grave escalation.
"It is one thing to charge a government official who has sworn an oath not to disclose classified information," said
Matthew Miller, who served as the Justice Department's chief spokesman under Mr. Obama's attorney general, Eric
H. Holder Jr. "It's another thing to charge someone outside the government who published information or solicited
information, which is something that reporters do all the time."
The charges against Mr. Assange are likely to face a challenge on First Amendment grounds. And journalists' use
of illegally obtained materials has been upheld in Supreme Court cases. But Mr. Miller said prosecutors had now
skated to the edge of criminalizing journalistic practices.
"The Espionage Act doesn't make any distinction between journalists and nonjournalists," Mr. Miller said, referring
to the law that Mr. Assange is accused of violating. "If you can charge Julian Assange under the law with
publishing classified information, there is nothing under the law that prevents the Justice Department from
charging a journalist."
A deeply divisive figure, Mr. Assange is in some ways an unlikely martyr for press freedoms. A crusader for radical
transparency, he is faulted by many American liberals for releasing hacked emails from the Democratic National
Committee at the height of the 2016 presidential race.
"The calculation by the Department of Justice is that here's someone who people don't like," Mr. Boutrous said.
"There's a real element of picking the weakest of the herd, or the most unpopular figure, to try to blunt the outcry."
Justice Department officials on Thursday cited Mr. Assange's mixed reputation as they tried to reject the notion
that they were interfering with the free press.
"The department takes seriously the role of journalists in our democracy, and we thank you for it," John Demers,
the head of the department's National Security Division, said at a briefing with reporters. "It is not, and has never
been, the department's policy to target them for reporting."
"Julian Assange is no journalist," Mr. Demers added.
Still, press advocates were quick to condemn the Justice Department on Thursday. The American Civil Liberties
Union called the indictment "a direct assault on the First Amendment." The Reporters Committee for Freedom of
the Press described it as "a dire threat."
Alan Dershowitz, the Harvard lawyer who has been a recent ally of Mr. Trump, said the case against Mr. Assange
was "really the first time since the Pentagon Papers that the government has gone after publishers."
"We all think there's a difference between The New York Times and Assange from a practical point of view, but
from a constitutional point of view, it's hard to find that difference," Mr. Dershowitz said. "They're both publishing
classified, stolen material."
"This is analogous to if The New York Times and The Washington Post had been prosecuted after publishing the
Pentagon Papers," Mr. Dershowitz added, referring to the top-secret report on Vietnam whose publication in 1971
was upheld by the Supreme Court. "It's a very, very frightening development."
But Asha Rangappa, a lawyer and former F.B.I. counterintelligence agent, said she believed that the Justice
Department had made a crucial distinction between Mr. Assange's activity and the work of traditional journalists.
"He wasn't simply a passive recipient of classified information; he actively participated in the breaking of the law,"
Ms. Rangappa said. She added that Mr. Assange's efforts to help his source, Ms. Manning, illegally obtain
documents amounted to "aiding and abetting the criminal act itself."
"That is a meaningful distinction from a bona fide news organization that truly has a public interest goal," Ms.
Rangappa said.
Seymour Hersh, the investigative journalist who exposed the My Lai massacre during the Vietnam War and
misconduct by the C.I.A., among other revelations, wrote in an email that the move against Mr. Assange was
troubling.
"Today Assange," Mr. Hersh wrote. "Tomorrow, perhaps, The New York Times and other media that published so
much of the important news and information Assange provided."
{END}

{START}
The Swedish authorities announced on Monday that they would reopen an investigation into a rape allegation
against Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, who is serving a prison term in Britain for jumping bail as the
United States seeks his extradition over accusations that he tried to assist in a huge breach of classified data.
The United States has already begun trying to extradite Mr. Assange, an effort that was expected to be prolonged
and complex even before the announcement in Stockholm on Monday.
British officials will determine which case takes precedence, Swedish prosecutors said, adding that if Mr. Assange
were eventually extradited to Sweden, he could not be sent to the United States without the consent of Britain.
The investigation stems from an accusation in August 2010 made by a Swedish woman who said Mr. Assange had
sexually assaulted her.
Mr. Assange was removed from the Ecuadorean Embassy in London last month and promptly arrested, seven
years after seeking refuge to avoid extradition in an earlier Swedish investigation into the same case. He was then
sentenced to 50 weeks for jumping bail.
With Mr. Assange in custody, the United States began the extradition process on a conspiracy charge -- punishable
by up to five years in prison -- over his alleged attempt to assist in one of the largest leaks of classified materials in
American history.
On Monday, Eva-Marie Persson, Sweden's deputy director of public prosecutions, announced the decision to
reopen the Swedish investigation at a news conference in Stockholm. She said the authorities there were acting
because there was still probable cause to suspect that Mr. Assange had committed the crime.
"I take the view that there exists the possibility to take the case forward," Ms. Persson said.
The decision to reopen the investigation is not equivalent to making a decision to indict Mr. Assange, she said, but
a European arrest warrant will be issued so that the Swedish authorities can take him into custody and question
him.
Per Samuelsson, Mr. Assange's Swedish lawyer, said he was surprised by the decision to reopen the investigation.
"It's not proportionate," Mr. Samuelsson said. "To force him to concentrate on this old investigation is highly
unreasonable."
The Swedish authorities began investigating the WikiLeaks founder in 2010, after two women accused him of
assaulting them during separate sexual encounters while he was visiting Stockholm.
The Swedish authorities issued a European arrest warrant in seeking his extradition from Britain for questioning
over "suspicion of rape, three cases of sexual molestation and illegal coercion."
Mr. Assange was arrested by the British police in 2011, and after a series of failed appeals while he was out on bail,
he fled to the Ecuadorean Embassy to avoid extradition.
Sweden dropped the initial investigation in May 2017, after concluding that there was no way to proceed with the
case as long as Mr. Assange was holed up in the embassy. Prosecutors indicated at the time that they reserved
the right to reopen their inquiry.
Last month, days after Mr. Assange was removed from the embassy, having worn out his welcome with his hosts,
Sweden announced that a lawyer requested that the investigation be reopened into the accusation of rape brought
by one of the women.
The prosecution still falls within the country's 10-year statute of limitations; it has already passed for the sexual
molestation and unlawful coercion accusations.
The same day Mr. Assange was removed from the embassy, the United States unsealed an indictment against him
on a charge that stems from a leak of hundreds of thousands of documents, mostly related to the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan, which were published by WikiLeaks.
The American authorities have accused Mr. Assange of conspiring with Chelsea Manning, a former Army
intelligence analyst, to crack an encoded password that would have permitted her to log into a classified Pentagon
network under someone else's identity.
At Mr. Assange's first hearing in the extradition case, he told the judge that he did not wish to surrender to the
United States to be prosecuted for what he called "journalism that has won many awards."
Ms. Persson, the Swedish prosecutor, said that because Mr. Assange has been convicted of a crime in Britain, he
would serve at least 25 weeks of his sentence. The Swedish authorities hope to question Mr. Assange while he is
still in British detention, Ms. Persson said, but that would require his consent.
She also said that it would be up to Britain to determine whether the United States' extradition request or the
Swedish investigation takes precedence.
Mr. Assange's fate could ultimately lie with Sajid Javid, Britain's home secretary. In the case of multiple extradition
requests for one individual, the home secretary may defer proceedings on one of the requests until the other has
been completed.
Assuming Sweden submits a European arrest warrant, its claim would most likely take precedence, said Michael
O'Kane, a British extradition lawyer. "Arguably the rape allegation is more serious," Mr. O'Kane said.
The arrest warrant and extradition requests will first proceed through the British court system, a process that could
take six months to a year.
One of Mr. Assange's accusers in Sweden, Anna Ardin, has publicly identified herself. She told the Swedish
newspaper Aftonbladet that Mr. Assange was "a man who has a twisted attitude toward women."
Last month, Ms. Ardin tweeted, "For me this was never about anything else than his misconduct against
me/women and his refusal to take responsibility for this."
Mr. Assange and his supporters have long maintained that the accusations were attempts to discredit him and
said that the efforts to extradite him to Sweden were a pretext to send him to the United States.
Kristinn Hrafnsson, the editor in chief of WikiLeaks, said in a statement released shortly after the Swedish
prosecutors' announcement that reopening the case "will give Julian a chance to clear his name."
{END}

{START}
LONDON -- Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, appeared in a British court on Thursday for an initial hearing
on whether he will be extradited to the United States to face prosecution in connection with one of the most
serious leaks of classified material in American history.
Mr. Assange, 47, made a brief appearance by video link in Westminster Magistrates Court in London from

Belmarsh Prison in another part of the city. A day earlier, he had been sentenced to 50 weeks in prison for bail-
jumping.
The hearing on Thursday lasted just a few minutes, in which Mr. Assange told the judge that he did not wish to
surrender himself to be prosecuted in the United States for what he called "journalism that has won many awards,"
according to The Associated Press. His next hearing, in what promises to be a long extradition fight, is scheduled
for May 30.
The American indictment against him stems from a leak in 2010 of hundreds of thousands of classified
documents, mostly related to the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, that proved damaging and embarrassing for the
United States and its allies. Mr. Assange faces a charge of conspiring with the former Army intelligence analyst
Chelsea Manning to hack into a Pentagon computer network, a crime punishable by up to five years in an American
prison.
Around two dozen activists gathered outside the court to protest against his potential extradition, waving signs
that read "Free Julian Assange" and "Is this all just about shutting us all up?" as they demanded his release.
The case has fueled debate about whether the prosecution of Mr. Assange infringes on the American
Constitution's First Amendment right to freedom of speech. He says that he acted as a journalist in publishing
material leaked by Ms. Manning to WikiLeaks and that he had nothing to do with the hacking.
But the Justice Department says Mr. Assange helped Ms. Manning break a code to gain access to the classified
network.
Ms. Manning was convicted of espionage in an American court and received a 35-year prison sentence. She spent
nearly seven years behind bars before her punishment was commuted by President Barack Obama in 2017.
Legal experts say that Mr. Assange could face additional charges if extradited but that the extradition process
could take years. The WikiLeaks founder has long fought against being transferred to the United States, citing
comments from officials in Washington calling for the death penalty to be considered for his crimes.
Mr. Assange holed up in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London for seven years to avoid being extradited to Sweden
to face sexual assault allegations. He called himself a political refugee, claiming that Sweden would send him to
the United States.
Swedish prosecutors have not closed the door on charges there.
Mr. Assange was arrested last month after the government of Ecuador suspended the asylum and citizenship that
it had granted him.
Speaking outside the courtroom on Wednesday, a day before the hearing on Mr. Assange's potential extradition to
the United States, Kristinn Hrafnsson, WikiLeaks' editor in chief, called it the start of a "big fight."
"What is at stake there could be a question of life or death for Mr. Assange," he told reporters. "It is also a question
of life and death for a major journalistic principle."
Cristina Navarrete, 66, was among the crowd of supporters outside the court on Thursday. She called the hearing
"a mockery" because no members of the public were allowed into the courtroom, though some journalists were
admitted.
"They chose a small court on purpose, it's basically a secret trial," Ms. Navarrete said in the packed foyer outside
the guarded doors of the court.
"If he is extradited, we'll be very disappointed in the British justice system," she added.
Ben Brandon, a prosecutor working for the United States government who was in the Westminster court on
Thursday, said that even if Mr. Assange were to complete his British prison sentence before a decision on the
American extradition request, he would remain in custody. In that situation, he could apply to be released on bail
until a final decision on extradition, Mr. Brandon said.
After the hearing, Jennifer Robinson, Mr. Assange's lawyer, said the American charge would cause a "massive chill
on investigative journalism."
"No democratic nation would behave this way," she said.
{END}

{START}
LONDON -- A British court sentenced Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder, to 50 weeks in prison on Wednesday
for jumping bail when he took refuge in Ecuador's Embassy in London seven years ago.
His complex legal travails are far from over: The United States is seeking Mr. Assange's extradition for prosecution
there, and an initial hearing on that request is expected on Thursday. Officials in Sweden have left open the
possibility that he could face criminal charges in that country, as well.
Mr. Assange faces a charge of conspiracy to hack into a Pentagon computer network; a federal indictment
accuses him of helping an Army private to illegally download classified information in 2010, much of it about the
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, which WikiLeaks then made public. He has denied the charge.
Mr. Assange, 47, was arrested on April 11 after the Ecuadorean government withdrew its protection of him and
allowed the police to take him out of the embassy in London, where he had lived since 2012. The same day, he
appeared in court and was convicted on the charge of skipping bail.
Mr. Assange, who is being held in Belmarsh Prison in East London, argued that he should not be jailed for the
offense, because he was effectively imprisoned in the embassy. On Wednesday, in Southwark Crown Court in
London, Judge Deborah Taylor rejected that claim.
"It's difficult to envisage a more serious example of this offense," she told Mr. Assange, British news organizations
reported. "By hiding in the embassy you deliberately put yourself out of reach, while remaining in the U.K."
Before he was sentenced, the court heard an apology letter by Mr. Assange, in which he said that he was
"struggling with difficult circumstances."
"I did what I thought at the time was the best or perhaps the only thing that I could have done," he said, according
to British news reports. "I regret the course that that has taken."
His legal odyssey began in 2010, when prosecutors in Sweden sought to question him about alleged sexual
assaults there, which he denies. Eventually, he had to post bail to remain free while fighting extradition to Sweden,
which he insisted would then send him to the United States.
After exhausting his appeals in the British courts, rather than submit to extradition, Mr. Assange took refuge in
Ecuador's embassy, violating the terms of his bail. Ecuador granted him asylum and, eventually, citizenship.
He continued his work from the embassy, and in 2016, WikiLeaks released thousands of emails hacked from the
Democratic National Committee and the personal account of John D. Podesta, the chairman of Hillary Clinton's
campaign, intending to harm her candidacy. The special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, concluded that the emails
were stolen by Russian intelligence agents, which Mr. Assange denies.
The 2010 release of Pentagon records was made possible by Chelsea Manning, then known as Bradley Manning,
the Army private who would later serve around seven years in prison for taking them. The indictment against Mr.
Assange says he did not merely publish the material provided by Ms. Manning, but helped her in the hacking,
which he disputes.
Mr. Assange insists that the government is seeking retribution for his exposure of misconduct and deception by
American troops and officials.
Swedish prosecutors eventually dropped the case against Mr. Assange, calling it pointless to pursue it, but said
they could revive it if he became available. Nevertheless the bail-jumping charge, and the threat of extradition to
the United States, still hung over him.
Last month, Ecuador revoked his asylum and citizenship, citing a list of grievances that had made him an
unwanted house guest, ranging from recent WikiLeaks releases to alleged ill manners, threats, hacking aimed at
Ecuador, and abuse of embassy staff members and facilities.
Ecuador stopped sheltering Mr. Assange after "his repeated violations to international conventions and daily-life
protocols," President Lenin Moreno said in a statement on Twitter.
But Mr. Assange didn't go easily: He resisted arrest and had to be restrained by British police officers, who
struggled to handcuff him.
"This is unlawful, I'm not leaving," he told them, according to the account given at the Westminster Magistrates
Court, where Mr. Assange appeared later that day. In the end, he had to be dragged out of the embassy.
Mr. Assange, a man accustomed to celebrity and internet culture, has long fascinated and divided popular opinion:
To supporters, he is a martyr for the cause of free speech, but others see him as a publicity-seeking criminal with
strong ties to the Kremlin.
He has indicated that he would fight extradition, and the process promises to be a long one, further extending his
saga.
{END}

{START}
To the journalism mainstream, Julian Assange, newly imprisoned founder of WikiLeaks, is less a hero than a
conundrum. True, he was midwife to some of the most sensational and genuinely consequential journalistic
disclosures of recent years. Yet he's a perplexing figure, among the "righteous scumbags" who often figure in free-
speech cases, as a headline on the Columbia Journalism Review website puts it, or maybe just "a solid jerk," as the

columnist Kathleen Parker suggests.
The underlying question is whether Mr. Assange is too reckless, undiscerning, unprincipled and morally damaged
to merit defending for his work in getting hugely significant information to the public, via some of the same news
media that now find him distasteful.
Many journalists doubt that he deserves First Amendment consideration, since that belongs mainly to other
journalists, which they say Mr. Assange isn't. And it's true that he's plainly not a reporter, since he conveys
information unearthed by others, and not a publisher either, since he often works through other news outlets to
reach the public.
So he isn't really one of us. Worse, he's a rogue. He even helped the Russians defeat Hillary Clinton in 2016. Until
April 11, when his hosts invited the London constabulary to drag him out and put him behind bars, he'd been
squatting for nearly seven years in Ecuador's tiny embassy there to avoid extradition to Stockholm, where the
Swedes wanted him to answer allegations of sexual wrongdoing. Now, in the aftermath, The Washington Post's
editorialists declare he's not "a free-press hero," and the headline on an article by The Post's foreign affairs
columnist, David Ignatius, asks whether he's anything more than "an accused thief."
My answer is he's a lot more. News is in danger, and news isn't a person, it's a process, which desperately needs
protecting. The element of that process that is most in peril is the source, and for all his sins, real and alleged,
Julian Assange has been one of the most extraordinary sources of the new millennium.
WikiLeaks enabled spectacular disclosures of official secrets -- from war crimes, torture and atrocities on civilians
in Iraq and Afghanistan to corruption in Kenya and Tunisia, the latter a catalyst of the Arab Spring. His jailing is the
latest event in the ferocious reprisal against a decade of digital whistle-blowing -- which has never, to my
knowledge, yielded information that was inaccurate or unimportant -- and that has now produced little but misery,
banishment or imprisonment for the people who tried to force officialdom to come clean.
So we're in a chilly time for whistle-blowers. While the digital age is endlessly permissive in propagating falsity and
racism, authorities are uncompromisingly harsh when the information is accurate, important and inconvenient.
Now that Mr. Assange is in British hands -- awaiting extradition either to Sweden or to Washington, where he has
been indicted on a charge of coaching one of his sources, Chelsea Manning, on how to get access to government
secrets without detection -- it's a good time to consider what he has done and been accused of, and what that says
about the embattled state of journalism.
Let's recall some facts of importance. In 2010 -- and this is when the sin for which Mr. Assange has been jailed was
supposedly committed -- WikiLeaks provided some of the world's most respected news organizations with
accurate information of deep public importance that exposed outrageous, even murderous, wrongdoing. Mr.
Assange then submitted -- perhaps gracelessly, but submitted nonetheless -- to their editorial judgment as to how
much of that information should be published and in what form. This included a vast trove exposing the American
war effort in Iraq and Afghanistan as killing many more civilians than our government had ever acknowledged. A
further batch included a huge number of reports from our own diplomats on the corruption and double-dealing of
foreign governments.
Pretty good stuff, on balance. Still, there's little sympathy in the media for the idea that jailing Mr. Assange is a
violation of First Amendment press freedom -- while there's broad agreement that prosecuting the news
organizations that published the material he provided would be unthinkable. This is bolstered by First Amendment
jurisprudence that encourages a myopia that holds expressive freedom in the news realm to be the exclusive
property of professional journalists. At first glance, this makes no moral sense: If the handing over of secrets can
be prosecuted, why should the publication of those same secrets be protected?
The fabled Pentagon Papers win before the Supreme Court in 1971 stopped the government from halting
publication; it didn't forbid prosecuting the publishers afterward. That never happened. But the sources? Daniel
Ellsberg and Anthony Russo were left to confront Espionage Act charges for their whistle-blowing that were not
dismissed for nearly two years. They got little help from the same media that were eager to canonize themselves
for their courage in publishing the leaks.
Why are whistle-blowers being jailed while reporters who publish their prohibited leaks win awards? Does the
government's restraint reflect nothing more than the reluctance of politicians to do battle with the digital
equivalent of publishers who buy ink by the barrel?
Perhaps, though that has helped ensure press independence as a powerful force for official accountability. But
shouldn't sources also have independent standing as players indispensable to the news and deserving of
constitutional protection? Can you have a free press without sources? Isn't the process of news-gathering
dependent not just on the skill and tenacity of reporters, but also on the willingness of sources to step forward,
sometimes at great risk, and tell what they know?
Ms. Manning, the former Army intelligence analyst who was Mr. Assange's source for the 2010 disclosures, is back
behind bars -- after serving nearly seven years for espionage for leaking secrets to WikiLeaks -- for refusing to
incriminate Mr. Assange in the squirrelly case the government is trying to assemble. The former National Security
Agency contractor Edward Snowden, under indictment since 2013, remains exiled in Russia for exposing domestic
surveillance that was later ruled illegal by federal courts, as Mr. Snowden himself believed. That's not to mention
Thomas Drake, Shamai Leibowitz, John Kiriakou, Stephen Kim, Jeffrey Sterling and, most recently, Reality Winner.
All of them were informants who sought not to peddle secrets to the country's enemies but to share information
with the public about things they believed we needed to know. All were prosecuted, nearly all were jailed. The
wrongs they sought to expose were not trivial.
The permissibility of secrecy violations should depend, in the final analysis, on a judgment as to whether the leaks
made things better or worse. The public-benefit defense, which whistle-blowers can offer in many countries, is
forbidden in ours. That should change. Yes, letting leakers use it may induce people to do foolish things in the
poorly based hope they'll be redeemed by a future consequence they cannot know. But it also offers a powerful
promise: that ultimately the wisdom of the disclosure, even if illegal, will be reviewed by a dispassionate tribunal
that will do what judges are supposed to do -- make a judgment. Was the secrecy warranted? Was wrongdoing
properly exposed? Did disclosure leave the public well served?
The media's own de facto immunity from prosecution has been a great success historically, and no breach in that

should be tolerated. Importantly, news organizations have responded to the freedom it ensures by following due-
diligence practices that apply much the same logic described here -- identify and minimize potential harms while

serving the public's right to be informed about matters of significance. Aren't the media's indispensable helpmates,
their sources, entitled to some of that same deference?
Edward Wasserman is a professor of journalism and dean of the Graduate School of Journalism at the University
of California, Berkeley.
{END}

{START}
QUITO, Ecuador -- Just hours after the British police dragged the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange out of the
Ecuadorean Embassy in London, the police in Ecuador made an arrest they suggested was related and involved the
nation's security.
But in the days since, the arrest has drawn a wave of protest from human rights activists and digital security
advocates who say there is no evidence yet of a crime -- only that of guilt by association.
The man arrested, Ola Bini, a Swedish cybersecurity expert and digital privacy advocate, was detained April 11 on
charges that he had attacked computer systems in the country.
As evidence, prosecutors pointed to the laptops, iPads, iPods, encrypted USB sticks and credit cards they found
when they searched Mr. Bini's home and possessions. They noted that Mr. Bini traveled often and had spent more
than $230,000 in internet services over the past five years.
Ecuador's officials particularly cited Mr. Bini's contacts with Mr. Assange, who faces extradition to the United
States on charges of conspiring to hack an American government computer to obtain national security
information.
Last week, President Lenin Moreno of Ecuador said that Mr. Bini was one of "many hackers" who had visited Mr.
Assange at the country's embassy in London, where the WikiLeaks founder had sought refuge. "Probably to receive
instructions," Mr. Moreno added.
But as news of the detention has spread, human rights and digital security advocates have begun to question the
grounds for the detention, arguing that Mr. Bini, 36, worked to prevent illegal access to private information.
Amnesty International and Article 19, an organization that defends free speech, have raised concerns about the
arrest.
Mr. Bini "is a highly respected expert in digital security and cryptography and is recognized for major contributions
in the field," Article 19 said in a statement. David Kaye, the United Nations' special rapporteur on freedom of
opinion and expression, said that nothing revealed so far connects Mr. Bini to any crime.
Danny O'Brien, the international director at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, said Mr. Bini's work had helped build
a safer internet. The evidence that Ecuadorean authorities presented was simply "the sort of equipment you have
when you work in those sort of projects," he said.
"People contributing their free time to protect internet users have their skills and their lifestyle used against them,"
Mr. O'Brien said, a point of recurring concern among human rights advocates.
Mr. Bini was arrested at the international airport in Quito, Ecuador's capital, on his way to Japan to take part in a
martial arts program, said his girlfriend, Sofia Celi. Later, government officials went on television to applaud the
arrest -- and mention his visits to Mr. Assange.
The minister of interior, María Paula Romo, said the government was trying to prevent Ecuador from turning into a
center for digital "espionage and piracy." Ms. Romo said she could not comment on the evidence against Mr. Bini,
but she, too, noted that he had visited Mr. Assange at the Ecuadorean Embassy "at least a dozen times."
Mr. Bini's lawyers say the detention is unlawful. They say he was denied access to lawyers for 17 hours, was not
informed of the charges against him, and was not offered a translator, as required by local laws. His lawyers said
they have been harassed and threatened by the police.
Mr. Bini, who was not granted bail, will remain in custody for 90 days while Ecuadorean prosecutors build a case
against him.
Mr. Bini moved to Ecuador in 2013, when he was working as a consultant for ThoughtWorks, a technology
company based in Chicago. The Ecuadorean government had contracted with the company to consult on a new
law governing software development.
He had joined the company around 2008, and when ThoughtWorks started offering cybersecurity consultancies,
Mr. Bini focused on that area, said Ronaldo Ferraz, who was ThoughtWorks' manager for Latin America and Africa
at the time and oversaw Mr. Bini's work.
He said that Mr. Bini was being accused of doing "the very same things he protected people against" and that the
idea of Mr. Bini's illegally accessing private information "runs contrary to everything he believes."
Two weeks after Mr. Bini's arrival in Ecuador, he gave an address titled "Ecuador as a Privacy Paradise" at a
technology event hosted by a state university, during which he expressed concern about governments' use of
technology to monitor citizens.
After his arrest, Mr. Bini's parents flew to Ecuador and gave a news conference denying their son was involved in
wrongdoing and saying that his friendship with Mr. Assange was not enough to incriminate him.
Mr. Bini's girlfriend, Ms. Celi, is a coder herself and has written academic papers with him on cryptography. She

said there seemed to be a lack of understanding about the work Mr. Bini did, and what "cryptographic and privacy-
preserving tools actually mean."

In a note handed to his parents while they visited him in prison, Mr. Bini offered his thanks for the support he is
receiving.
"I appreciate it more than I can say," he wrote. "If Ecuador can do this, so can others."
{END}

{START}
WASHINGTON -- The Justice Department continued to investigate WikiLeaks last year even after the secret
indictment of its founder, Julian Assange, seeking to question at least two of the antisecrecy organization's
volunteers about their activities, according to interviews and a letter obtained by The New York Times.
One day after prosecutors charged Mr. Assange with a single count of conspiracy to unlawfully hack into a
computer, the Justice Department asked Daniel Domscheit-Berg, a former WikiLeaks activist, if it could question
him about the possibility that he violated American laws prohibiting "the receipt and dissemination of secret
information." The language, in a letter to him in his native German, suggested that prosecutors had not, at least at
that point, abandoned the possibility of charges based on WikiLeaks' publication of United States government
secrets.
Prosecutors last summer also sought out David M. House, a former researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology who worked as a volunteer for WikiLeaks from 2009 to 2013.
Mr. House spoke for about 90 minutes to prosecutors and also testified at length to the grand jury, according to a
person who has spoken with prosecutors and agreed to an interview on the condition of anonymity. They pressed
him for information about debates inside WikiLeaks over whether to redact from government documents posted
online the names of vulnerable people, such as foreign citizens who worked confidentially with American military
officers or diplomats, to protect them from harm.
The communications with Mr. Berg and Mr. House show that even after Mr. Assange was indicted on accusations
of computer hacking, the United States government was eager to build a case against a WikiLeaks associate for
disseminating state secrets -- a charge that spoke directly to the group's main enterprise, but would also thrust the
Justice Department into a thorny fight over First Amendment rights and galvanize supporters of WikiLeaks and of
the free press.
They also show that prosecutors were focused mainly on work done by WikiLeaks in 2010, when Mr. Assange
received classified and secret information from Chelsea Manning, a former Army intelligence analyst, about the
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and American diplomacy overseas.
Mr. Assange worked with reporters at publications including The New York Times, The Guardian and the German
magazine Der Spiegel to publish that information. Eric H. Holder Jr., then the attorney general, announced a
criminal investigation of WikiLeaks.
Justice Department officials under the Obama administration ultimately decided they could not prosecute Mr.
Assange for sharing information because it risked setting a precedent that could erode press freedoms for news
organizations that also publish classified information.
But prosecutors in Northern Virginia continued to explore ways to crack down on WikiLeaks.
The letter to Mr. Berg, dated March 7, 2018 -- one day after Mr. Assange was secretly indicted -- was sent by Tracy
Doherty-McCormick, a cybercrime and national security specialist who worked on the Assange case while she was
a federal prosecutor in Virginia under the Obama administration. She was also the acting United States attorney
for the Eastern District of Virginia when Mr. Assange was indicted.
Ms. Doherty-McCormick wrote that the interview would be voluntary, and it was unclear whether Mr. Berg
ultimately spoke with prosecutors. The German publication Die Zeit first reported the case against Mr. Berg.
A Justice Department spokesman declined to say whether the government had dropped its case against Mr. Berg
or whether there were any sealed charges against him or any other WikiLeaks associates.
In his interviews with prosecutors and the grand jury, Mr. House denied any role in the leak of the documents from
Ms. Manning to WikiLeaks, the person said. Mr. House's interview with prosecutors and grand jury testimony were
first reported by The Daily Beast.
He was asked about online chats among WikiLeaks workers that investigators had obtained and was questioned
about discussions inside the group about when to redact names from documents posted on the internet.
The question of redactions became a point of contention in 2010, after human rights groups criticized WikiLeaks
for exposing the names of Afghan citizens who had assisted the United States and might be subject to retaliation.
The group subsequently stripped names from many documents but remained inconsistent in its practices.
It is unclear whether investigators were considering whether endangering people named in the government
documents by posting them online might violate a criminal statute.
Mr. Assange was ultimately accused of unsuccessfully helping Ms. Manning try to log onto a classified military
network by breaking a passcode and using another person's identity. He was charged with a single computer
hacking offense.
The indictment against Mr. Assange did not include any charge related to the receipt or publication of secret
information, but he was accused of hacking into a government computer system "in furtherance of a criminal act"
that violated laws against obtaining material to harm the United States or to aid a foreign power.
Nor did the indictment mention the 2016 election or Mr. Assange's decision to post to WikiLeaks troves of
Democratic emails stolen by Russian government hackers.
The special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, secured an indictment against 12 Russian military officers in the thefts,
describing them as part of the Kremlin's campaign to undermine the American electoral process and help Mr.
Trump win the election. The Russians used online personas including Guccifer 2.0 to work with people and
organizations in a position to spread the information, including WikiLeaks, according to the indictment.
WikiLeaks' publication of the stolen Democratic emails may have been omitted from Mr. Assange's indictment in
part because mention of the election could cast the Justice Department's charges against Mr. Assange in a more
political light, legal experts said, and harm the administration's chances of extraditing him from Britain to stand
trial in the United States.
{END}

{START}
To the Editor:
Re "Britain Arrests Assange, Ending 7-Year Standoff" (front page, April 12):
The arrest of Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, should give all of us pause to re-examine our feelings
regarding his self-described career as a journalist.
Though I do support most efforts to expose corruption, my concern with Mr. Assange is that he usually fails to use
filters, as most respected journalists would. He has always seemed more interested in owning the headlines (as
we are only too painfully aware that narcissists like to do) and creating chaos than in righting a wrong or fighting a
good fight.
To obtain a story, to expose corruption, to bring a wrong into the light of day, all of these can be done with good,
old-fashioned investigative reporting and persistence. Hacking into computers at the Pentagon and certain other
nefarious deeds should not be seen as useful tools toward that end, but rather a "look what I can do" moment by a
rebellious, criminal eccentric.
Patricia Weller
Emmitsburg, Md.
{END}

{START}
The secrets came directly from the phones of President Lenín Moreno of Ecuador: intimate pictures of him and his
family on vacation, text messages from his wife, even a photograph of the president himself in a posh bedroom,
eating a lobster in bed.
The material, published last month on an anonymous website, was particularly embarrassing because Mr. Moreno
was in a bruising national fight over his austerity measures. But rather than mount a defense, the president played
the victim: He blamed WikiLeaks, whose founder, Julian Assange, had spent the last seven years holed up in the
country's London embassy.
WikiLeaks' actions were "despicable," said the country's vice president on television, vowing to take action. The
group denied leaking the information, but on Thursday Ecuador made good on its threat -- opening the door to
British police officers who carted away Mr. Assange.
With that, Mr. Assange's long refuge inside the Ecuadorean Embassy finally came to an end, the capstone of an
international cat-and-mouse game involving stolen document dumps, promises of more to come, failed efforts to
contain him and accusations of blackmail.
Even as Ecuador harbored Mr. Assange from international prosecution, he and WikiLeaks wielded the threat of
releasing damaging information against the Ecuadorean government.
In October 2016, as WikiLeaks was releasing thousands of emails hacked from the Democratic National
Committee and the personal account of John D. Podesta, the chairman of the Clinton campaign, Ecuador restricted
Mr. Assange's access to the internet, citing his interference in a foreign election.
The United States may have played a central role in the effort to corral Mr. Assange. On Oct. 14, with the emails
upending the campaign and the election just weeks away, a confidante of the Clintons and a top aide to Secretary
of State John Kerry showed up at a dinner party hosted by the Ecuadorean ambassador before a ball, lingering with
him as other guests left, several attendees said.
Mr. Assange's internet was curtailed by the Ecuadorean Embassy the very next day.
But WikiLeaks quickly retaliated, issuing a cryptic message that a leak against Ecuador was on its way. The tactic
seemed to work. Two months later, Mr. Assange said in an interview that his internet had been restored.
Mr. Assange has been hailed by many around the world as a champion of transparency and a casualty of his own
success at revealing secrets.
In Britain, the leader of the opposition Labour Party, Jeremy Corbyn, said this week that his country should oppose
the extradition of Mr. Assange to the United States -- where he faces a charge of conspiring to hack a Pentagon
computer network in 2010 -- because the WikiLeaks founder was being pursued for "exposing evidence of
atrocities in Iraq and Afghanistan."
Diane Abbott, another Labour Party official, made the same assertion, arguing that Mr. Assange "is not being
pursued to protect U.S. national security; he's being pursued because he has exposed wrongdoing by U.S.
administrations and their military forces."
But Ecuadorean officials contend that the expulsion comes from an extensive list of transgressions by Mr.
Assange that soured their long -- and often strained -- relationship.
In explaining his decision, Mr. Moreno accused Mr. Assange of installing electronic distortion equipment in the
embassy, blocking security cameras, confronting and mistreating guards and gaining access to security files
without permission.
On Thursday, the government said it had also arrested a computer programmer in Ecuador in connection with the
Assange case, contending that WikiLeaks had interfered in Ecuador's domestic political affairs.
WikiLeaks insisted it was not involved in the hack of Mr. Moreno's phones, and that the Ecuadorean government
was using the episode as a false pretext to toss out Mr. Assange.
It was no secret that the United States wanted him removed. It was also clear that Mr. Moreno is eager for
international loans and better relations with the United States after the tensions that festered under his leftist
predecessor, who granted Mr. Assange shelter in the embassy.
"I inherited this situation," Mr. Moreno said in a video address this week.
Fernando Cutz, a former senior adviser to H.R. McMaster, the former national security adviser, and a Latin America
policy specialist at the White House, acknowledged that American officials regularly spoke with their Ecuadorean
counterparts about handing over Mr. Assange.
But Mr. Cutz argued that Ecuadorean officials did not simply cave to American demands. They wanted Mr.
Assange gone as well, he said.
"We would definitely raise it with Ecuador," Mr. Cutz said. "It was a bilateral irritant, without a doubt. But I don't
think the U.S. pressure ended up being the reason for this move. Bettering relations with the U.S. was just the icing
on the cake for Moreno. Assange was his own worst enemy."
Mr. Assange's odyssey with Ecuador began in 2012, when he skipped a bail hearing to avoid being extradited to
Sweden, where he was wanted for questioning in connection to accusations of "rape, sexual molestation and
unlawful coercion."
Ecuador's president at the time, Rafael Correa, had been criticized in his own country for a crackdown against the
press. But in Mr. Assange, the Ecuadorean president found a symbol of his challenge to the United States, which
he called an imperialist power. Mr. Assange was free to stay in the embassy as long as he pleased, Mr. Correa said.
But by 2016, a change in power was afoot in both the United States and in Ecuador. Hillary Clinton, who had run
the State Department during the enormous leak of information by WikiLeaks in 2010, was running for president.
Mr. Assange also had reason to worry about the coming election in Ecuador, where his stay in the embassy was
becoming a campaign issue as well.
On Oct. 7, 2016, a tape was leaked showing Mrs. Clinton's opponent, Donald J. Trump, boasting of sexually
harassing women while filming a segment for the show "Access Hollywood," sending Mr. Trump's campaign into a
major crisis.
Less than an hour later, WikiLeaks began publishing the first of thousands of hacked emails from Mr. Podesta's
account, creating a different controversy in the Clinton camp.
WikiLeaks continued to release the emails throughout October on a daily basis. American intelligence agents later
concluded that the documents had been hacked by Russian operatives and laundered through WikiLeaks.
When Ecuador restricted Mr. Assange's internet access in response, Mr. Correa's administration said that it had
acted on its own accord, not because of pressure from the United States. A spokesman for Mr. Kerry also denied
that the Obama administration played any role.
But during the encounter on Oct. 14 -- the night before Mr. Assange's internet access was restricted -- Patsy
Thomasson, a veteran of the Clinton White House, and a senior aide to Mr. Kerry attended a dinner at the
Ecuadorean Embassy hosted by Francisco Borja, the ambassador of Ecuador.
Attendees interviewed said it struck them as odd that such high-powered players would decide to attend a party
hosted by a small country's ambassador. They noted that neither Ms. Thomasson nor the Kerry aide was dressed
in black tie for the ball, and that both stayed behind with the ambassador after other guests left for the event.
Ms. Thomasson, reached by phone, said she had been invited at the very last minute by someone whose wife
couldn't come, and that she did not recall having any conversations with the ambassador, "much less about Julian
Assange."
WikiLeaks struck back soon after. On Oct. 16, the day after Mr. Assange's internet was restricted, WikiLeaks
tweeted a code, known in its parlance as an "insurance file," and signaled that an upcoming leak involving Ecuador
was imminent.
According to former WikiLeaks insiders, Mr. Assange had damaging information about Ecuador and wasn't
bluffing.
Mr. Assange certainly seemed to have acquired compromising material. In 2015, Cynthia Viteri, a prominent
Ecuadorean politician, and Fernando Villavicencio, an Ecuadorean political journalist, had gotten secret documents
showing that Ecuador was running a surveillance program, using an Italian company to spy on journalists and
political enemies, in addition to spying on Mr. Assange at the embassy.
Mr. Villavicencio said he sent the material to a WikiLeaks email address, hoping the organization would publish the
information. He eventually published the documents himself. WikiLeaks never did, though it is clear from leaked
2015 chat group logs from WikiLeaks Forum, a related site, that Mr. Assange and his inner circle were aware of
them.
Mr. Villavicencio said he believed the documents he sent to WikiLeaks may have been among those that Mr.
Assange had threatened to publish.
"There was very valuable information, information of millions of dollars in expenses, tens of millions of dollars in
contracts to foreign companies to do illegal hacking -- and it surprised me it didn't get out," he said. "It was
information of international and national interest."
Nothing ever came of the Ecuador-related "insurance file" WikiLeaks tweeted about in October 2016.
"From 2011, WikiLeaks did not leak relevant information regarding Correa's government," Mr. Villavicencio said.
"That certainly shows hypocrisy and a double standard, contradicting journalism principles."
The controversy was just the beginning of Mr. Assange's difficulties. Mr. Moreno took over as president in May
2017 and soon broke with the policies of his predecessor.
Advisers to Mr. Moreno met with Paul Manafort, who had served as President Trump's campaign chairman, and
raised the possibility of releasing Mr. Assange in exchange for concessions like debt relief. Mr. Moreno said
repeatedly that Mr. Assange's time in the embassy should not be forever.
Then, Mr. Moreno's government was hit by a familiar disruption: more leaks.
In March, an anonymous website, INApapers.org, published around 200 private emails related to Mr. Moreno, text
messages written by his wife and photos of the president and his family taking luxurious vacations in Europe.
Mr. Moreno's government was quick to blame the release on WikiLeaks, which it says Mr. Assange still controls.
On Thursday, Mr. Moreno repeated the claim, telling Ecuadorean journalists that Mr. Assange didn't have the right
to "hack private accounts or phones."
{END}

{START}
WASHINGTON -- In June 2016, five months before the American presidential election, Julian Assange made a bold
prediction during a little-noticed interview with a British television show.
"WikiLeaks has a very big year ahead," he said, just seconds after announcing that the website he founded would
soon be publishing a cache of emails related to Hillary Clinton.
He was right. But an indictment unsealed on Thursday charging Mr. Assange with conspiring to hack into a
Pentagon computer in 2010 makes no mention of the central role that WikiLeaks played in the Russian campaign
to undermine Mrs. Clinton's presidential chances and help elect President Trump. It remains unclear whether the
arrest of Mr. Assange will be a key to unlocking any of the lingering mysteries surrounding the Russians, the
Trump campaign and the plot to hack an election.
The Justice Department spent years examining whether Mr. Assange was working directly with the Russian
government, but legal experts point out that what is known about his activities in 2016 -- including publishing
stolen emails -- is not criminal, and therefore it would be difficult to bring charges against him related to the
Russian interference campaign.
Numerous significant questions are left unanswered, including what, if anything, Mr. Assange knew about the
identity of Guccifer 2.0, a mysterious hacker who American intelligence and law enforcement officials have
identified as a front for Russian military intelligence operatives.
Court documents have revealed that it was Russian intelligence -- using the Guccifer persona -- that provided Mr.
Assange thousands of emails hacked from the Democratic National Committee and the personal account of John
D. Podesta, the chairman of the Clinton campaign.
Another question is whether Mr. Assange was a conduit between the Russian hackers and the Trump campaign.
Mr. Assange exchanged emails with Donald Trump Jr., Mr. Trump's eldest son, during the campaign, and a Trump
campaign official sent Roger J. Stone Jr., a longtime adviser to the president, to get information about the hacked
Democratic emails, according to a January indictment by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel.
Mr. Mueller concluded his investigation without an indictment that directly connected WikiLeaks, the Russians and
the Trump campaign, suggesting that prosecutors did not find sufficient evidence that Mr. Assange knowingly
engaged in a conspiracy with Russia to help the Trump campaign.
But the report drafted by Mr. Mueller's team, and expected to be released next week, could have additional details
about the ties between the Trump campaign and Mr. Assange. Those details could be redacted by the Justice
Department, however, if officials believe the material includes classified intelligence, said Carrie Cordero, a former
official with the Justice Department's National Security Division and the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence.
"What was the actual interaction between Russian intelligence surrogates, WikiLeaks and Trump campaign
surrogates?" she said. "That is a question that has not yet been answered."
On Thursday, congressional Democrats sent a letter to Attorney General William P. Barr again demanding that they
be provided the full, unredacted report, along with underlying evidence.
The special counsel also handed off his work to other prosecutors, including those who have long been examining
Mr. Assange's dealings with Guccifer, the Russian intelligence front.
Many Democrats and Republicans remain convinced that Mr. Assange knowingly worked with Russian
intelligence. On Thursday, Senator Richard M. Burr, the North Carolina Republican who is chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, said Mr. Assange and WikiLeaks "have effectively acted as an arm of the Russian
intelligence services for years." The committee's Democratic vice chairman, Senator Mark Warner of Virginia, said
Mr. Assange had become "a direct participant in Russian efforts to undermine the West."
Mr. Assange has long been a polarizing figure -- hailed at the beginning of his career as champion for government
transparency but also viewed by American national security officials as a disruptive force who conspired with
Chelsea Manning, the former Army intelligence analyst, to publish hundreds of thousands of classified documents.
But it was WikiLeaks' publication of material stolen by Russian intelligence in 2016 that hardened the view of
national security officials.
In April 2017, in one of his first major speeches, Mike Pompeo -- who was C.I.A. director at the time but months
earlier, as a Republican congressman, had praised WikiLeaks for its releases that damaged the Clinton campaign --
signaled that the government would take a hard line on WikiLeaks.

Mr. Pompeo compared WikiLeaks to "a hostile intelligence service," and said it sought support from anti-
democratic countries as it targeted the United States with its disclosures.

Mr. Pompeo's public remarks coincided with a private push against Mr. Assange by the Trump administration. The
C.I.A. intensified espionage efforts against WikiLeaks, seeking to learn more about his interactions with the
Russian intelligence operatives.
The timing of Mr. Assange's actions fueled suspicions. His June 2016 interview announcing the impending release
of Democratic emails came three days after a meeting at Trump Tower in New York between Russians and senior
Trump campaign officials -- a meeting set up on the promise that the Russians would have damaging information
about Mrs. Clinton.
Throughout the 2016 campaign, Mr. Assange played down accusations of Russian interference, and misled the
public on his source for the damaging documents WikiLeaks released.
He offered a $20,000 reward for information about the killing in Washington of Seth Rich, a young Democratic
National Committee staff member shot to death in an apparent bungled street robbery. Some supporters of Mr.
Trump suggested that it was Mr. Rich who had leaked the committee's emails and that he had been killed in
retaliation.
During an August 2016 discussion with Dutch television about the sources of WikiLeaks' information, Mr. Assange
suddenly brought up Mr. Rich's killing.
"That was just a robbery, I believe, wasn't it?" the interviewer said. "What are you suggesting?"
"I'm suggesting that our sources take risks," Mr. Assange said. He then declined to say if Mr. Rich was a source.
{END}

{START}
WASHINGTON -- The WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange was arrested on Thursday in London to face a charge in
the United States of conspiring to hack into a Pentagon computer network in 2010, bringing to an abrupt end a
seven-year saga in which he had holed up in Ecuador's embassy in Britain to avoid capture.
The Ecuadorean government suspended the citizenship it had granted Mr. Assange and evicted him on Thursday,
clearing the way for his arrest. His hosts had displayed growing impatience, listing grievances including recent
WikiLeaks releases they said interfered with other states' internal affairs and personal discourtesies, like the failure
of Mr. Assange to clean the bathroom and look after his cat.
A bedraggled and shackled Mr. Assange, 47, was dragged out of the embassy. At a court hearing, a judge swiftly
found him guilty of jumping bail, and he was detained partly in connection with an American extradition warrant.
Mr. Assange indicated that he would fight extradition, and legal experts said that process could take years. He is
likely to argue that the case is politically motivated rather than driven by legitimate legal concerns.
Mr. Assange's arrest brought to a head long-simmering tensions that have raised profound First Amendment press
freedom issues. Since Mr. Assange began publishing archives of secret American military and diplomatic
documents in 2010 -- provided by the former Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning -- senior officials in two
administrations had weighed whether to try to put him out of business by charging him with a crime. Ms. Manning
was convicted at a court-martial trial in 2013 of leaking the documents.
The Obama administration had explored whether to bring charges against Mr. Assange but decided not to, in part
because of fears of creating a precedent that could chill traditional journalism. But in November, an accidental
court filing appeared to disclose that the Trump administration had secretly charged him with some unspecified
offense.
The indictment unsealed Thursday, however, revealed that prosecutors in Northern Virginia had not charged Mr.
Assange under the Espionage Act for publishing government secrets. Instead, they charged him with conspiring to
commit unlawful computer intrusion based on his alleged agreement to try to help Ms. Manning break an encoded
portion of passcode that would have permitted her to log on to a classified military network under another user's
identity.
Because traditional journalistic activity does not extend to helping a source break a code to gain illicit access to a
classified network, the charge appeared to be an attempt by prosecutors to sidestep the potential First
Amendment minefield of treating the act of publishing information as a crime. Nevertheless, journalists should still
be worried, said Barry Pollack, a lawyer for Mr. Assange.
"While the indictment against Julian Assange disclosed today charges a conspiracy to commit computer crimes,
the factual allegations against Mr. Assange boil down to encouraging a source to provide him information and
taking efforts to protect the identity of that source," Mr. Pollack said. "Journalists around the world should be
deeply troubled by these unprecedented criminal charges."
Spokesmen for the Justice Department's National Security Division and for the United States attorney in the
Eastern District of Virginia declined to comment.
Mr. Assange has been in the sights of the United States government since his organization began publishing Ms.
Manning's leaks in 2010, bringing to light many secrets -- like revealing that more civilians had died in Iraq than
official estimates showed, detailing the accusations against Guantánamo detainees and airing American
diplomats' unvarnished takes on what was happening around the world -- vaulting WikiLeaks to fame. A grand jury
in Virginia began investigating people with links to WikiLeaks.
Most recently, Mr. Assange has been under attack for his organization's release during the 2016 presidential
campaign of thousands of Democratic emails stolen by Russian hackers. (Russian intelligence officers apparently
adopted the guise of a hacker calling itself Guccifer 2.0 when providing the files to WikiLeaks.) But the conspiracy
charge against Mr. Assange is not related to WikiLeaks' role in Russia's operations to sabotage the election.
The internal government debate over whether to charge Mr. Assange continued under the Trump administration
and was accelerated by Jeff Sessions, the attorney general at the time, according to former officials involved in the
discussions. It centered on whether Mr. Assange was a journalist or whether at least some of his actions could be
deemed crimes unrelated to journalism.
A hacking offense cited in the indictment carries an eight-year statute of limitations, which may have played a role
in spurring the Trump administration to decide whether to move forward: The unsealed court papers indicated that
a grand jury returned the indictment on March 6, 2018 -- almost eight years to the day that Mr. Assange is accused
of agreeing to help Ms. Manning try to crack the password, court papers showed.
The indictment says Mr. Assange made that agreement on March 8, 2010. Had they succeeded, prosecutors said,
it would have helped Ms. Manning cover her tracks by making it harder for the government to later identify who
had copied files. But Mr. Assange's efforts evidently failed -- he told Ms. Manning two days later, on March 10, that
he had "no luck so far," according to the court filing.
Also on March 8, prosecutors said, Ms. Manning told Mr. Assange, "After this upload, that's all I really have got
left." Mr. Assange replied, "Curious eyes never run dry in my experience."
That exchange came at a time when Ms. Manning had copied and sent to WikiLeaks archives of logs of significant
events in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars and dossiers about Guantánamo Bay detainees, but she had not yet sent
the group hundreds of thousands of diplomatic cables from American embassies around the world, the indictment
said. Weeks later, she began copying and uploading the State Department messages to WikiLeaks, it said.
The pair also tried to cover their tracks by removing user names from the disclosed information and deleting their
chat logs, according to the indictment.
During her court-martial, in which some of Mr. Assange's efforts to help were also discussed, Ms. Manning took
complete responsibility for her actions and said that Mr. Assange had not pushed her to take them.
"No one associated with W.L.O." -- an abbreviation she used to refer to the WikiLeaks organization -- "pressured me
into sending any more information," she said at the time. "I take full responsibility."
Ms. Manning was convicted and sentenced to 35 years in prison for leaking the files and served about seven -- the
longest of any convicted leaker in American history -- before President Barack Obama commuted most of the
remainder of her sentence shortly before leaving office in 2017.
Ms. Manning is in jail again. A judge held her in civil contempt last month for refusing to testify before a grand jury
about her interactions with WikiLeaks.
If Mr. Assange is convicted on the conspiracy to hack offense alone, he could face up to five years in prison. The
government could later seek to charge him with additional offenses, but because of extradition practices, any such
superseding indictment would most likely need to come soon, before Britain formally decides whether to transfer
custody of him.
Until recently, Mr. Assange's Ecuadorean citizenship, granted in 2017, presented a hurdle in President Lenín
Moreno's efforts to remove him from the embassy. Ecuador's Constitution limits the government's ability to turn
over citizens to a foreign justice system, especially if they could face torture or the death penalty, which are
outlawed in Ecuador.
The country's former foreign minister, María Fernanda Espinosa, originally granted Mr. Assange's citizenship, citing
a policy that allowed certain foreigners under "international protection" to be naturalized. She argued that Mr.
Assange's refuge at the embassy was a case that qualified.
However, on Thursday, Ecuador's current foreign minister, José Valencia, said Mr. Assange's citizenship had been
suspended because of irregularities, opening the door for him to be handed to the British authorities.
Mr. Assange took refuge in the Ecuadorean Embassy in June 2012 to avoid extradition to Sweden, where he faced
questions about sexual assault accusations, which he has denied. Sweden rescinded its arrest warrant for Mr.
Assange in 2017, but he refused to leave the embassy.
Under a previous president, Ecuador had offered Mr. Assange citizenship and open-ended refuge in its embassy.
But its government soured on the relationship as the years kept passing, and it eventually began to impose limits
on what Mr. Assange could say and do.
The Ecuadorean government said last year that it had cut off Mr. Assange's internet access, saying that he had
violated an agreement to stop commenting on, or trying to influence, the politics of other countries. The
government also imposed other restrictions, like limiting his visitors. He sued in October, claiming that it was
violating his rights.
On Thursday, Mr. Moreno, who became Ecuador's president in 2017, said on Twitter that his country had decided to
stop sheltering Mr. Assange after "his repeated violations to international conventions and daily-life protocols."
{END}

{START}
WASHINGTON -- Charges against Julian Assange, the founder and leader of WikiLeaks, that were unsealed on
Thursday brought to a head a long-running debate about whether his actions construed a crime and what
prosecuting him would mean for American press freedoms.
Mr. Assange vaulted to global fame in 2010, when his anti-secrecy website began posting archives of secret
American military and diplomatic documents leaked by Chelsea Manning, an Army intelligence analyst who had
downloaded them from a classified computer network she worked on at her outpost in Iraq. His image became
more complicated in 2016, when WikiLeaks published stolen Democratic emails that the Russian government had
hacked as part of its covert operation to damage Hillary Clinton and help Donald J. Trump win the presidency.
Throughout that saga, national security and law enforcement officials in both the Obama and the Trump
administrations have weighed whether they could charge Mr. Assange with a crime. That debate has raised
concerns by press freedom advocates about what any precedent established by his case would mean for First
Amendment rights and the future of investigative journalism in the United States.
Why does the case against Mr. Assange raise concerns about press freedoms?
Mr. Assange is not a traditional journalist, but most of what he does at WikiLeaks is difficult to distinguish in a
legally meaningful way from what traditional news organizations, like The New York Times, do every day: seek out
and publish information that officials would prefer to be kept secret, including classified national security matters,
and take steps to protect the confidentiality of sources.
In recent years, prosecutors have begun far more regularly charging officials with leaking information to reporters
under the Espionage Act, a World War I-era law. It criminalizes the disclosure of potentially damaging national
security secrets to someone not authorized to receive them. On its face, the Espionage Act could also be used to
prosecute reporters who publish government secrets.
While many legal scholars believe that prosecuting reporters for doing their jobs would violate the First
Amendment, the prospect has never been tested in court because the government has never charged a journalist
under that law. The rumblings about prosecuting Mr. Assange raised the possibility that prosecutors could violate
that norm and try to establish that publishing government secrets can be a crime.
Was Mr. Assange charged with publishing secrets?
No. When the indictment was unsealed on Thursday, it showed that a grand jury had instead charged Mr. Assange
with conspiring with Ms. Manning to illegally hack a government computer to obtain national security information.
Specifically, the indictment said, on March 8, 2010, Mr. Assange agreed to help Ms. Manning try to crack part of an
encoded password that would have let her gain access to more information than her own account provided.
Prosecutors also cited a chat log from two days later that they said indicated that Mr. Assange had taken steps to
act on that conspiracy: He said he had "no luck so far" in trying to crack the password.
So can people concerned about press freedoms rest easy?
Not quite. For now, the case significantly reduces such concerns because it is outside traditional investigative
journalism to help sources try to break passcodes so they can illegally hack into government computers.
But some press freedom advocates say they remain concerned. For one thing, the Justice Department could file a
superseding indictment, so there is no guarantee that Espionage Act charges will stay out of the case. Under
extradition procedures, however, any additional charges would most likely have to come soon -- before Britain
decides whether to transfer custody of Mr. Assange.
For another, prosecutors cited details that expanded beyond a narrow focus on cracking the passcode and that
sounded like typical activities of a journalist. For example, the indictment talks about efforts to conceal
conversations by using a special chat service and deleting certain chat logs. It also says Mr. Assange took a step
to help Ms. Manning send him the files, by making a special folder for her to upload files.
And it quotes a purported exchange midway through Ms. Manning's leaks in which she wrote, "After this upload,
that's all I really have got left," but Mr. Assange replied, "Curious eyes never run dry in my experience." Several
weeks later, according to the indictment, Ms. Manning copied and sent WikiLeaks the diplomatic cables.
The Justice Department's inclusion of those details as relevant to the case was cause for worry, said Jameel
Jaffer, the executive director of the Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University.
"The indictment and the Justice Department's press release treat everyday journalistic practices as part of a
criminal conspiracy," he said. "Whether the government will be able to establish a violation of the hacking statute
remains to be seen, but it's very troubling that the indictment sweeps in activities that are not just lawful but
essential to press freedom -- activities like cultivating sources, protecting sources' identities and communicating
with sources securely."
Could Mr. Assange be charged later in connection with Russia's election interference?
It would not be easy.
The Espionage Act does not cover the disclosure of unclassified emails like the Democratic messages, so
prosecutors would have to come up with a theory in which publishing them violated some other law. Even if they
could find one, a 2001 Supreme Court ruling held that the First Amendment did not permit prosecutors to charge
someone with a crime for publishing or broadcasting information so long as no law was broken in acquiring it --
even if the source who provided it did something illegal to obtain it.
No one has suggested that the Russians needed or had any help from Mr. Assange in hacking Democrats' emails.
And Mr. Assange has denied knowing who his source was; at the time, Russian military intelligence officers
created the fictitious online persona of a hacker calling himself Guccifer 2.0 to disseminate and call attention to
the files, although evidence that it was most likely a front for Russian intelligence was broadly discussed.
What about the statute of limitations?
Normally, the statute of limitations prevents prosecutors from charging people with a crime for actions that took
place more than five years ago. However, a hacking provision cited in the indictment -- intruding into a government
computer to obtain national security secrets -- has an eight-year limit. A grand jury returned the indictment of Mr.
Assange on March 6, 2018, just before the eighth anniversary of the day that Mr. Assange is accused of entering
into a conspiracy with Ms. Manning to violate that law.
There is an oddity: As part of the USA Patriot Act after the Sept. 11 attacks, Congress added that provision to a list
of crimes that get an eight-year limit under a separate law titled "extension of statute of limitation for certain
terrorism offenses." While Mr. Assange's case involves national security, it is not about terrorism. The "terrorism"
heading most likely makes no legal difference, however -- just as prosecutors can use the words of the Espionage
Act to charge leakers, not just spies.
Is a trial imminent?
No. Mr. Assange is widely expected to fight extradition to the United States by arguing in British court that his
prosecution is politically motivated. That fight and inevitable appeals could take years to play out.
{END}

{START}
APRIL - NOVEMBER 2010
WikiLeaks Publishes Classified American Documents
WikiLeaks burst onto the scene in 2010. In April that year it released a graphic decrypted video from Iraq. In July, it
published a six-year archive of classified American military documents about the war in Afghanistan. The group

released a second cache of secret reports, this time about the Iraq war, in October. Next, it published a quarter-
million confidential American diplomatic cables.

Since then, WikiLeaks appears to have gradually shifted its focus to releasing material that benefits Russia, to the
consternation of many of its former allies and defenders. Mr. Assange was a persistent problem for the Obama
administration, releasing embarrassing documents from the United States and other countries. Meanwhile,
President Trump during his campaign repeatedly expressed glee over WikiLeaks' release of confidential emails
from the Democratic National Committee and the Clinton campaign, even after American officials said the emails
had been given to WikiLeaks by hackers working for Russian intelligence.
U.S. Investigates WikiLeaks
Army investigators suspected that the source of the leaks was Pfc. Bradley Manning, now known as Chelsea.
Private Manning was court-martialed in June 2010, and in August 2013 she was sentenced to 35 years in prison for
passing information to WikiLeaks. President Barack Obama commuted her sentence at the end of his second term,
and she was released in May 2017.
SEPTEMBER - DECEMBER 2010
A Rape Investigation
and Extradition Request
Mr. Assange was investigated in August and September 2010 on charges of rape and molestation after separate
complaints from two women. Sweden issued an extradition warrant for him in November that said Mr. Assange
was wanted for questioning in connection with accusations of "rape, sexual molestation and unlawful coercion."
He said he was afraid that Sweden would turn him over to the United States, where WikiLeaks has been under
investigation.
NOVEMBER 2011 - JUNE 2012
Assange Goes to Court
A British court ruled in November 2011 that Mr. Assange could be extradited to Sweden. His lawyers challenged
that decision, having argued at a February 2011 hearing that he would not receive a fair trial if extradited to
Sweden. He lost his final appeal before Britain's Supreme Court in June 2012.
AUGUST 2012
Ecuador Grants Asylum
Ecuador rejected pressure from Britain and granted Mr. Assange political asylum in August 2012. He had already
spent two months living in the country's embassy in London. The decision left Mr. Assange confined to the
embassy: Ecuador could protect him as long as he remained on Ecuadorean territory, but if he left the embassy he
was subject to arrest by the British police.
JANUARY 2016
U.N. Panel Rules in His Favor
A United Nations rights panel said in January 2016 that Britain and Sweden had arbitrarily detained Mr. Assange,
should restore his freedom of movement and should compensate him. The panel said that Swedish prosecutors
had not pressed charges and had never shown Mr. Assange evidence against him or given him a chance to
respond. The ruling was disregarded by both countries, and Mr. Assange remained in the embassy.
NOVEMBER 2016
Questioned at the Embassy
Swedish prosecutors, with Ecuador's help, questioned Mr. Assange for four hours at the embassy in London. His
Swedish lawyer, Per E. Samuelson, was not summoned to attend, and on Radio Sweden, he questioned the validity
of the interview.
APRIL 2017
A New Ecuadorean President
Lenín Moreno is elected president of Ecuador, succeeding Rafael Correa, a leftist who had been in power for a
decade. During the campaign, several candidates had vowed to evict Mr. Assange from the embassy if they won.
Mr. Moreno said he would let Mr. Assange stay, but has been significantly more critical than his predecessor,
calling Mr. Assange a hacker and warning him not to meddle in politics.
MAY 2017
Sweden Drops
Rape Investigation
Swedish prosecutors said they would stop the rape investigation into Mr. Assange. The chief prosecutor, Marianne
Ny, made clear that this did not mean he was being pronounced innocent. Ms. Ny said that proceeding with the
case would require Mr. Assange to be served notice of the charges against him and for him to be present in a
Swedish court, both of which were impossible.
In Britain, he still faces a warrant for failing to appear in court.
JANUARY 2018
Ecuador Grants Citizenship
In early 2018, Ecuador announced that it had made several moves to end the long diplomatic standoff, including
granting Mr. Assange citizenship in December, a few months after he asked for it.
Days later, Ecuador asked Britain to give Mr. Assange diplomatic immunity so he could leave the embassy, but
Britain declined. Still, the Ecuadorean government pushed on, saying it would seek a mediator to help broker a
potential deal that would free him to leave the building.
FEBRUARY 2018
Warrant Is Upheld in the U.K.
A British judge twice upheld the outstanding arrest warrant against Mr. Assange for jumping bail when he took
refuge in the embassy in 2012. It was not clear that a ruling in his favor would have led to his going free, because
the United States and Britain have never said whether there is a secret request to extradite him to face charges in
an American court.
NOVEMBER 2018
An Indictment
Mistakenly Revealed
A court filing revealed that the Justice Department had prepared an indictment against Mr. Assange, although it
was not clear whether charges had been filed against him. The existence of the indictment became known only
after prosecutors inadvertently mentioned possible charges against him in an unrelated case. Seamus Hughes, a
terrorism expert at George Washington University who closely tracks court cases, discovered the document and
posted it on Twitter.
APRIL 2019
Assange Is Arrested at Embassy and Charged by U.S.
The United States charged Mr. Assange with one count of conspiracy to hack a computer related to his role in the
2010 release of secret American documents.
Hours earlier, Mr. Assange had been arrested by the British authorities at the Ecuadorean Embassy in London,
where he had lived since 2012.
This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.
{END}

{START}
The arrest in London of the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange ends one bizarre saga, but opens a legal drama that
is likely to stretch over many years and could probe uncharted areas of press freedoms and national security in the
United States in the digital era. There is good reason to be watchful as the case unfolds.
Mr. Assange, a 47-year-old Australian, had spent almost seven years holed up in the Ecuadorean Embassy, initially
to avoid arrest on Swedish sex charges that have since been dropped, then British charges of skipping bail. But
extradition to the United States was what Mr. Assange really feared, and what the cat-and-mouse game was
always about.
It was in the United States that the materials posted on WikiLeaks created the greatest furor, first through the
publication of a trove of classified documents supplied by an Army private, Chelsea Manning, and then by
releasing material stolen from the computers of Hillary Clinton's campaign.
The Obama administration was wary of pursuing Mr. Assange because WikiLeaks was essentially involved in
investigative work common to a free press. But the Trump administration saw Mr. Assange and WikiLeaks as
targets as soon as it took office. (Mr. Trump loved WikiLeaks in 2016 when it was embarrassing top officials of the
Clinton campaign.) Two years ago, as director of the C.I.A., Mike Pompeo labeled WikiLeaks "a nonstate hostile
intelligence service" after it released a cache of C.I.A. hacking tools. Efforts got underway then to build a case
against Mr. Assange. This was confirmed through an inadvertent mention in a federal court filing last November.
Mr. Assange, meanwhile, managed to exhaust his welcome at the Ecuadorean Embassy, and on Thursday British
police officers unceremoniously bundled the scraggly-bearded refugee off in a van. Soon after, Scotland Yard
acknowledged that it was also acting on an American extradition warrant, after which a federal indictment was
unsealed in the United States charging Mr. Assange with conspiring to hack a government computer.
The single charge is straightforward: It alleges that Mr. Assange helped the Army private break into a government
computer in 2010 to steal classified and sensitive documents. According to the indictment, when Ms. Manning
told Mr. Assange that she had no more material to send him, he replied, "Curious eyes never run dry in my
experience." Ms. Manning served almost seven years of a 35-year sentence for the leak, and is now back in jail for
refusing to testify before a grand jury investigating WikiLeaks.
The still-unproven charge is far less contentious than had it been, as widely anticipated, for espionage-related
crimes. That would have been a direct challenge to the distinction between a journalist exposing abuse of power
through leaked materials -- something traditional newspapers like The Times do all the time -- and a foreign agent
seeking to undermine the security of the United States through theft or subterfuge.
These questions will arise in any event -- starting with the extradition hearings, at which Mr. Assange's lawyers are
likely to argue that the American charges are politically motivated. And if Britain does extradite him, there is no
certainty that the Trump administration, with its combative stance toward the press and its documented recent
antipathy for Mr. Assange, will not throw more charges at him.
The issues WikiLeaks raises are vitally important. The responsibilities, ethics and rules of journalism are fast
changing in an era when terabytes of secret data can be dumped in a flash, and when hostile governments like
Russia's can burrow into foreign computers for compromising information and then launder it through other
channels.
The case of Mr. Assange, who got his start as a computer hacker, illuminates the conflict of freedom and harm in
the new technologies, and could help draw a sharp line between legitimate journalism and dangerous cybercrime.
Once in the United States, moreover, he could become a useful source on how Russia orchestrated its attacks on
the Clinton campaign.
The administration has begun well by charging Mr. Assange with an indisputable crime. But there is always a risk
with this administration -- one that labels the free press as "the enemy of the people" -- that the prosecution of Mr.
Assange could become an assault on the First Amendment and whistle-blowers.
{END}

{START}
The shaky video clips of Julian Assange's arrest flashed around the world on Thursday, the white-bearded prophet
of the age of leaks being hauled by unsmiling security officers to a gray van marked Police.
"We must resist!" he cried. "You can resist!" It was a scene that the very image-conscious Mr. Assange might
appreciate: one man literally fighting the all-powerful state.
It was also the latest -- and surely not the last -- dramatic turn in a career marked by both brilliant achievement and
dubious judgment. Mr. Assange has long had a knack for celebrity, and as a tech-savvy, global, almost stateless
figure, he captured the new influence the internet could give to individual citizens.
[Read more about the arrest of Julian Assange.]
His creation of WikiLeaks helped empower a generation of whistle-blowers and disgruntled insiders who could
operate on an industrial scale, providing disclosures by the terabyte and enraging the powerful in many countries.
WikiLeaks collaborated closely with major world publications, including The New York Times, in the release of
secret records on the American-led wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and a quarter-million confidential State
Department cables.
But Mr. Assange has always elicited fervent reactions: He has been hailed as a hero of free information, or
despised as a treacherous criminal worthy of death by drone -- often depending on what WikiLeaks had recently
been up to. Though he has always described himself as a journalist, he has been far too much of an activist to be
satisfied with the role of neutral and fair-minded provider of information.
He has proved a highly problematic, even embarrassing champion for the principles of press freedom and the
public's right to information, especially in recent years. For the past seven, he was hiding out at Ecuador's tiny
redbrick embassy in London, not just from American prosecutors, but also from Swedish sex-crime investigators,
who eventually closed their case.
Mr. Assange, the world's most famous self-proclaimed political refugee, lived there with his cat in a small corner
room. He continued to run WikiLeaks, conducted news conferences before hundreds of fawning admirers from a
balcony, rode his skateboard in the halls and played host to a parade of visitors, including Lady Gaga and Pamela
Anderson, a rumored lover who brought with her vegan sandwiches.
The arrest came at the end of a meandering legal path that began in 2010, when the Justice Department
announced it was investigating WikiLeaks. Obama administration officials eventually dropped the idea, persuaded
by press advocates that prosecuting WikiLeaks would set a dangerous precedent because many mainstream news
organizations regularly publish classified information.
In 2016, some of Mr. Assange's former American sympathizers turned sharply against him after he made
WikiLeaks into an enthusiastic instrument of Russia's intervention in the American presidential election, doling out
hacked Democratic emails to maximize their political effect, campaigning against Hillary Clinton on Twitter and
promoting a false cover story about the source of the leaks.
That performance drew voluble praise from her opponent, Donald J. Trump, who regularly read from leaked Clinton
campaign emails in his 2016 stump speeches and declared, "I love WikiLeaks." But months later, while he was
president, WikiLeaks posted a collection of classified documents on the C.I.A.'s hacking tools, and Mr. Trump's
first C.I.A. chief, Mike Pompeo, called Mr. Assange "a narcissist" and labeled the organization "a nonstate hostile
intelligence service."
His words were a harbinger of the single charge of conspiracy to commit computer intrusion against Mr. Assange
that the Justice Department unsealed on Thursday.
In some ways, Mr. Assange, 47, has never fully shed the rebellious, secretive ways of the precocious Australian
teenager with a complicated family background who, with two pals, formed a hacking collective called the
International Subversives. In the 1997 book "Underground," a lengthy account of the young hackers written by
Suelette Dreyfus and crediting Mr. Assange as "researcher," a hacker with the nickname Mendax clearly resembles
the young Julian.
Mendax found the small Australian town where Mr. Assange lived with his mother, Emerald, "dead boring," the
book says. "Sometimes Mendax went to school. Often he didn't. The school system didn't hold much interest for
him." A vulnerable computer network in Sydney, the book says, "was a far more interesting place to muck around in
than the rural high school."
In 1991, at age 20, Mr. Assange was charged with a long list of hacking offenses, to which he pleaded guilty and
got off with a fine and a warning. "There is just no evidence that there was anything other than sort of intelligent
inquisitiveness and the pleasure of being able to -- what's the expression -- surf through these various computers,"
the judge said at his sentencing, according to an account in The New Yorker.
"Underground" hints at a kind of qualified idealism, suggesting that Mendax and his comrades mostly shunned
theft and vandalism in favor of disclosure. The book describes "the early Australian underground's golden rules of
hacking: Don't damage computer systems you break into (including crashing them); don't change the information
in those systems (except for altering logs to cover your tracks); and share information."
By 2006, when he founded WikiLeaks, Mr. Assange had adopted a nomadic lifestyle, roaming the world and
pronouncing sometimes cryptic principles about secrecy and information. By 2008, he was living in East Africa and
exposing corruption in Kenya on the new site, which had published more than one million documents, including
some from the Iraq war and the Guantánamo prison, as well as a potpourri covering less momentous topics: an
early script for an Indiana Jones movie, Wesley Snipes's tax bill and documents from the Church of Scientology
and the Mormon Church.
But it was Chelsea Manning, then a low-level intelligence analyst stationed at a base in Iraq, who really put
WikiLeaks, and hence Mr. Assange, on the map. Bored and harboring doubts about the war and American foreign
policy, she began copying thousands of documents from a classified network onto CDs that she marked as Lady
Gaga songs to avoid detection.
Back in the United States, she called both The New York Times and The Washington Post before connecting with
WikiLeaks, where Mr. Assange and his fractious band of activist volunteers eagerly took up the cause in 2010.
They first posted a devastating video of two American helicopter gunships in Iraq shooting at suspected enemies
on the ground -- two of whom were among those killed and turned out to be war correspondents for Reuters. The
news organization had struggled to learn the details of the strike; now the world saw not just the view from the
helicopters, but it heard the pilots' casual exchanges as they opened fire three times.
Military officials accused WikiLeaks of leaving out crucial context, including the presence on the ground of several
rocket-propelled grenades and other weapons in the group that was targeted. WikiLeaks called the video "Collateral
Murder," an illustration of Mr. Assange's skill at spin.
That was followed by publication, in coordination with The Times and other mainstream news organizations, of
77,000 military documents from the war in Afghanistan and then 392,000 from the war in Iraq.
The War Logs, as they were called, were published in coordination with Le Monde, The Guardian and Der Spiegel,
and they shed new light on civilian casualties, soldiers' morale, the treatment of detainees and the use of
contractors. An editor's note explained that they provided "a real-time history of the war," but also struck an
ambivalent chord about their source, WikiLeaks, which the note said "was not involved in the news organizations'
research, reporting, analysis and writing."
Human rights groups complained that WikiLeaks' own publication of unredacted documents might put in danger
Afghans who were named as working with the United States military, and the Iraq documents were stripped of
names. When the diplomatic cables were published, The Times and other news organizations worked closely with
WikiLeaks to redact names to protect vulnerable people -- but later, in a dispute with a British editor, Mr. Assange
decided simply to publish the massive cable collection without any edits.
Meanwhile, WikiLeaks was plagued with infighting, often touched off by Mr. Assange's astringent style and ego.
Two women complained to Swedish authorities about Mr. Assange's sexual conduct with them, setting off a
yearslong quest of investigators to question him. Angry American politicians denounced Mr. Assange, whose
distinctive face had become recognizable worldwide, and called for his arrest or even his execution.
In 2012, Ecuador's foreign minister announced that Mr. Assange was at the embassy in London and had asked for
political asylum. Small as they were, Mr. Assange's living quarters at the embassy did not cramp his desire to
remain in the limelight. He pronounced his opinions on Twitter, briefly hosted a talk show on the Russian television
channel RT and continued to oversee the publication of leaked material and even sent an associate to assist
Edward Snowden, a former National Security Agency contractor, when he flew to Russia from Hong Kong -- even
though WikiLeaks had not played a role in Mr. Snowden's leak of agency documents.
Mr. Assange had an office equipped with a bed, sunlamp, phone, computer, kitchenette, shower, treadmill and
bookshelves. Vaughan Smith, a longtime supporter of Mr. Assange who helped put up his bail money, said that
"Julian's a big bloke, with big bones, and he fills the room physically and intellectually."
"It's a tiny embassy with a tiny balcony," Mr. Smith added. "Small, hot and with not great air flow, and it must be
jolly difficult for everyone there."
But Mr. Assange held court for admirers and famous curiosity seekers, among them the soccer star Eric Cantona
and Nigel Farage, the pro-Brexit radio host and former head of the U.K. Independence Party.
Eventually, Mr. Assange's isolation began to wear on him, a friend said on Thursday, especially the long, lonely
weekends in an essentially empty embassy that he could not leave.
He was becoming deeply depressed and wondered about simply walking out, the friend said, speaking on the
condition of anonymity. And relations with his hosts were becoming deeply strained, even adversarial, as
diplomats grew tired of his behavior. Even Mr. Assange's friends have described him as difficult, a narcissist with
an outsize view of his importance and little interest in mundane matters like personal hygiene.
A copy of a 2014 letter from Juan Falconí Puig, then Ecuador's ambassador to Britain, to the Foreign Ministry, seen
by The Times, complained of Mr. Assange's penchant for riding a skateboard and playing soccer with visitors. His
skateboarding, Mr. Falconí said, had "damaged floors, walls and doors." When a security guard tried to take his
soccer ball, Mr. Assange "began to shake, insult and push the agent," reclaimed the ball and then "launched the ball
at his body," the letter said.
Mr. Assange's presence in the embassy long after the Ecuadorean president who granted him political asylum had
been replaced finally became too much for the government in Quito. Last year, it severed his internet access and
limited his visitors.
On Thursday, President Lenín Moreno, elected in 2017, explained on Twitter and in a video the decision to evict
him.
"In a sovereign decision Ecuador withdrew the asylum status to Julian Assange after his repeated violations to
international conventions and daily-life protocols," he said.
Mr. Moreno accused Mr. Assange of having installed forbidden "electronic and distortion equipment," accessing
the embassy's security files without permission, blocking the embassy's security cameras and mistreating its
personnel, including guards.
Appearing in the Westminster Magistrates' Court, his silver hair tied in a bun, Mr. Assange looked composed in a
navy suit. The scene underscored the obvious: that Mr. Assange will use his legal predicament as a new platform
for his defiance of authority and his crusade for WikiLeaks.
Outside the courthouse, a flock of cameras were pointing toward the guarded entrance, and a group of protesters
chanted feebly: "Free, free, free Assange."
After Mr. Assange took his seat in court, a supporter wearing a scruffy fluorescent jacket gave him a thumbs-up
from the public gallery. Mr. Assange returned the gesture.
Waiting for the lawyers to enter, Mr. Assange read from a book, which he raised for the news media to see: "History
of the National Security State," by Gore Vidal.
{END}

